See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320853316

Being human – Meaning and suffering + Humanism, humanity and faith
(Special edition)
Book · November 2017

CITATION

READS

1

1,080

1 author:
John Horsfield
Alliance Research Group
2,323 PUBLICATIONS 279 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Utilization of Natural Resources View project

showmen travellers and funfairs View project

All content following this page was uploaded by John Horsfield on 04 November 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Being human – Meaning and suffering

Hearts & Minds Media 2017

Human beings and humanity? Meaning in a world of suffering
The Oxford dictionary defines humanity as “the quality of being humane,
benevolent”. And it defines human being as ” A man, woman, or child of the
species Homo sapiens, distinguished from other animals by superior mental
development, power of articulate speech, and upright stance.” Being human is given,
we all are born the same but keeping our humanity is a choice. At one hand we see
mankind being the biggest enemy to mankind whereas on the other hand we see
man not always living up to humanity but at least coming closer to it by trying.
The recognition of one’s humanity can be an uncomfortable pill to swallow. Life’s
fragility, life’s impermanence, life’s intertwinement with imperfection and
disappointment—bitter medicines are easier to accept. The Romantic poets called it
“the burden of full consciousness.” To look closely at humanity can indeed be a
realization of dread and despair.
To begin I believe we need to determine what constitutes the nature of a human
being as a species. Its distinguishing characteristics—including ways
of thinking, feeling, and acting—which humans tend to have or follow to function
normally.
In philosophy and science. The concept of human nature is traditionally contrasted
not only with unusual human characteristics, but also with characteristics which are
derived from specific cultures, and upbringings leading to a standard of normalised
behaviour which society basis’s its functioning upon. This is partly because human
nature can be regarded as both a source of norms of conduct or ways of life, as well
as presenting obstacles or constraints on living a good life.
Philosophy in classical Greece is the ultimate origin[] of the Western conception of
the nature of a thing. According to Aristotle, the philosophical study of human nature
itself originated with Socrates, who turned philosophy from study of the heavens to
study of the human things.[9] Socrates is said to have studied the question of how a
person should best live, but he left no written works. It is clear from the works of his
students Plato and Xenophon, and also by what was said about him by Aristotle
(Plato's student), that Socrates was a rationalist and believed that the best life and
the life most suited to human nature involved reasoning. The Socratic school was the

dominant surviving influence in philosophical discussion in the Middle Ages,
amongst Islamic, Christian, and Jewish philosophers.
The human soul in the works of Plato and Aristotle has a divided nature, divided in a
specifically human way. One part is specifically human and rational, and divided into
a part which is rational on its own, and a spirited part which can understand reason.
Other parts of the soul are home to desires or passions similar to those found in
animals. In both Aristotle and Plato, spiritedness (thumos) is distinguished from the
other passions (epithumiai).[10] The proper function of the "rational" was to rule the
other parts of the soul, helped by spiritedness. By this account, using one's reason is
the best way to live, and philosophers are the highest types of humans.
Aristotle—Plato's most famous student—made some of the most famous and
influential statements about human nature. In his works, apart from using a similar
scheme of a divided human soul, some clear statements about human nature are
made:
•

Man is a conjugal animal, meaning an animal which is born to couple when an
adult, thus building a household (oikos) and, in more successful cases, a clan or
small village still run upon patriarchal lines.[11]

•

Man is a political animal, meaning an animal with an innate propensity to develop
more complex communities the size of a city or town, with a division of labor and
law-making. This type of community is different in kind from a large family, and
requires the special use of human reason.[12]

•

Man is a mimetic animal. Man loves to use his imagination (and not only to make
laws and run town councils). He says "we enjoy looking at accurate likenesses of
things which are themselves painful to see, obscene beasts, for instance, and
corpses." And the "reason why we enjoy seeing likenesses is that, as we look,
we learn and infer what each is, for instance, 'that is so and so.'"[13]

For Aristotle, reason is not only what is most special about humanity compared to
other animals, but it is also what we were meant to achieve at our best. Much of
Aristotle's description of human nature is still influential today. However, the
particular teleological idea that humans are "meant" or intended to be something has
become much less popular in modern times.[14]

For the Socratics, human nature, and all natures, are metaphysical concepts.
Aristotle developed the standard presentation of this approach with his theory of four
causes. Every living thing exhibits four aspects or "causes": matter, form, effect, and
end. For example, an oak tree is made of plant cells (matter), grew from an acorn
(effect), exhibits the nature of oak trees (form), and grows into a fully mature oak tree
(end). Human nature is an example of a formal cause, according to Aristotle.
Likewise, to become a fully actualized human being (including fully actualizing the
mind) is our end. Aristotle (Nicomachean Ethics, Book X) suggests that the human
intellect (νούς) is "smallest in bulk" but the most significant part of the human psyche,
and should be cultivated above all else. The cultivation of learning and intellectual
growth of the philosopher, which is thereby also the happiest and least painful life.
In Chinese thought[]
Human nature is a central question in Chinese philosophy.[15] Human nature was
considered by Confucius and Mencius to be essentially good.[15] From the Song
dynasty the theory of the original goodness of human beings dominated Confucian
thought.[16] However, Hsun Tzu taught that human nature was essentially evil.[15] As
suggested by these contrasting views, the question of human nature has generated
a long debate among Chinese thinkers.[16]
Christian theology[]
: Christian theology
In Christian theology, there are two ways of "conceiving human nature". The first is
"spiritual, Biblical, and theistic", whereas the second is "natural, cosmical, and antitheistic."[17]The focus in this section is on the former. As William James put it in his
study of human nature from a religious perspective, "religion" has a "department of
human nature."[18]
Various views of human nature have been held by theologians. However, there are
some "basic assertions" in all "biblical anthropology."[19]
1. "Humankind has its origin in God, its creator."
2. "Humans bear the 'image of God'."
3. Humans are "to rule the rest of creation."

By Adam's fall into sin, "human nature" became "corrupt", although it retains
the image of God. Both the Old Testament and the New Testament teach that "sin is
universal."[31] For example, Psalm 51:5 reads: "For behold I was conceived in
iniquities; and in sins did my mother conceive me."[32] Jesus taught that everyone is a
"sinner naturally" because it is mankind's "nature and disposition to sin."[33] Paul, in
Romans 7:18, speaks of his "sinful nature."[34]
Such a "recognition that there is something wrong with the moral nature of man is
found in all religions"[35] Augustine of Hippo coined a term for the assessment that all
humans are born sinful: original sin.[36] Original sin is "the tendency to sin innate in all
human beings."[37] The doctrine of original sin is held by the Catholic Church and
most mainstream Protestant denominations, but rejected by the Eastern Orthodox
Church, which holds the similar doctrine of ancestral fault.
"The corruption of original sin extends to every aspect of human nature": to "reason
and will" as well as to "appetites and impulses." This condition is sometimes called
"total depravity."[38] Total depravity does not mean that humanity is as "thoroughly
depraved" as it could become.[39] Commenting on Romans 2:14, John Calvin writes
that all people have "some notions of justice and rectitude . . . which are implanted
by nature" all people.[40]
Adam embodied the "whole of human nature" so when Adam sinned "all of human
nature sinned".[41] The Old Testament does not explicitly link the "corruption of
human nature" to Adam's sin. However, the "universality of sin" implies a link to
Adam. In the New Testament, Paul concurs with the "universality of sin." He also
makes explicit what the Old Testament implied: the link between humanity's "sinful
nature" and Adam's sin[42] In Romans 5:19, Paul writes, "through [Adam's]
disobedience humanity became sinful."[43] Paul also applied humanity's sinful nature
to himself: "there is nothing good in my sinful nature."[44][45]
The theological "doctrine of original sin" as an inherent element of human nature is
not based only on the Bible. It is in part a "generalization from obvious facts" open to
empirical observation.[46]
Empirical view
A number of experts on human nature have described the manifestations of original
(i.e., the innate tendency to) sin as empirical facts.

•

Biologist Richard Dawkins in his The Selfish Gene states that "a predominant
quality" in a successful surviving gene is "ruthless selfishness." Furthermore,
"this gene selfishness will usually give rise to selfishness in individual
behavior."[47]

•

Child psychologist Burton L. White, PhD,[48] finds a "selfish" trait in children from
birth, a trait that expresses itself in actions that are "blatantly selfish."[49]

•

Sociologist William Graham Sumner finds it a fact that "everywhere one meets
"fraud, corruption, ignorance, selfishness, and all the other vices of human
nature."[50] He enumerates "the vices and passions of human nature" as "cupidity,
lust, vindictiveness, ambition, and vanity." Sumner finds such human nature to be
universal: in all people, in all places, and in all stations in society.[51]

•

Psychiatrist Thomas Anthony Harris, MD, on the basis of his "data at hand,"
observes "sin, or badness, or evil, or 'human nature', whatever we call the flaw in
our species, is apparent in every person." Harris calls this condition "intrinsic
badness" or "original sin."[52]

What is humanity as a virtue?
Confucian philosophy[]
Confucius said that humanity, or “Ren”(仁), is a “love of people” stating “if you want
to make a stand, help others make a stand.”[3] That is, the Confucian theory of
humanity exemplifies the golden rule. It is so central to Confucian thought that it
appears 58 times in the Analects.[4] Similar to the Christian process of seeking God,
Confucius teaches seeking Ren to a point of seemingly divine mastery until you are
equal to, or better than, your teacher.[5] The Confucian concept of Ren encompasses
both love and altruism.[6]
Greek philosophy[]
Plato and Aristotle both wrote extensively on the subject of virtues, though neither
ever wrote on humanity as a virtue, despite highly valuing love and kindness, two of
the strengths of humanity. Plato and Aristotle considered "courage, justice,
temperance" and "generosity, wit, friendliness, truthfulness, magnificence, and
greatness of soul" to be the sole virtues, respectively.[3]
Abrahamic religion[]

Humanity is one of Thomas Aquinas' "Seven Heavenly Virtues."[7] Beyond that,
humanity was so important in some positivist Christian cultures that it was to be
capitalized like God.[8] Kindness, altruism and love are all mentioned in the bible.
Proverbs 19:22 "states the desire of a man is his kindness." On the topic of altruism,
emphasis is placed on helping strangers (Hebrews 13:1) and the biblical adage "it is
better to give than to receive" (Acts 20:35).
Strengths of humanity[]
Love[]
Love has many different definitions ranging from a set of purely biological and
chemical processes to a religious concept. As a character strength, love is a mutual
feeling between two people characterized by attachment, comfort, and generally
positive feelings. It can be broken down into 3 categories: love between a child and
their parents, love for your friends, and romantic love.[9] Having love as a strength is
not about the capacity to love, as such, it is about being involved in a loving
relationship.
Love, in the psychological sense, is most often studied in terms of attachment to
others. A degree of controversy surrounds defining and researching love in this way,
as it takes away the “mystery of love.”[10] Because love is mysterious, to an extent, it
is most often studied in terms of attachment theory, because it can be studied in the
way across ages. In infants, attachment is studied through the Strange Situation
Test. Attachment to an individual, usually the mother, is determined by how
distressed the infant becomes when the mother is taken out of the experimental
setting.[11] There are several models of adult attachment including the Adult
Attachment Interviews (Kaplan & Main), Adult Attachment Prototypes (Hazan &
Shaver) and more. Generally adult attachment models focus on the mental
representation of the visible signs of attachment seen in infants.[12]
Evidence in support of the benefits of love are seen in the negative affect states that
result from lacking love. Orphaned children have been targeted in studies about
negative attributes resulting from lack of attachment. Smyke et al. found that children
raised in an environment that didn’t allow children to become attached to their
preferred caregivers experienced attachment disorders.[13] Additionally, individuals

who develop securely attached have a lower likelihood of depression, high-self
esteem, and less likelihood of divorce.[14]
Kindness[]
The strength kindness encompasses most related terms that evoke feelings of
altruism, generosity, helpfulness and a general desire to help people. That is, a
disposition for helping humanity. The following statements are from the Values in
Action (VIA) psychological assessment, aimed at determining people's strengths in
kindness: others are just as important to me, giving is more important than receiving,
I care for the ungrateful as well as the grateful.[15] Kindness, as a part of humanity, is
deeply rooted in philosophical and religious traditions, each having words for the
altruistic love aspect of kindness, such as agape in Greek, chesed in Hebrew, and
the Latin word philantropia, the root of the word "philanthropy."[15] Kindness is so
valued as a strength beyond religious and theoretical concepts that it is advocated
through school community service programs and national programs like AmeriCorps.
Additionally, while gender differences in kindness are statistically significant, they are
minimal, and the methods of testing used may not always have construct validity.[16]
Kindness is most often measured on a case by case measure and not usually as a
trait. The Self-Report Altruism Scale and the Altruism Facet Scale for Agreeableness
Measure of the Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) psychological
assessment are often used to ask people how often they engage in altruistic
behaviors and gauge their concern for others.[17] The former, however, only asks
about 20 specific altruistic acts, leaving out a wide range of altruistic behaviors.
There are numerous benefits from kindness and altruism on both sides of the action.
For some, the motivation to be kind comes from a place of egoistic motivation, and
thus the benefit to them is the positive affect state they receive from the
action.[18] Another study found that the process of being kind develops pro-social
skills in children, which positively effects their attachments and
relationships.[19] Additionally, volunteerism in the elderly has shown to lead to
decreased risk of early death, and mental health benefits.[20] One thing to note is the
difference between altruism as a trait and as an act.[20]

A good example of kindness is a program founded by Bahadur Chand Gupta, which
provides free airplane ride experience to the underprivileged and poor Indians for
just 1 USD.[21]
Social Intelligence[]
Social intelligence is the most modern of the three strengths associated with
humanity. The Character Strengths and Virtues (CSV) psychological assessment
defines social intelligence as the ability to understand “relationships with other
people, including the social relationships involved in intimacy and trust, persuasion,
group membership, and political power.”[22]
Intelligence has many psychological definitions from Weschler’s intelligence to the
various theories of multiple intelligence. The CSV divides intelligence into hot and
cold, hot intelligence being those intelligences related to active emotional processes.
(338) Individuals with high social intelligence are very self-aware, and effective
organizers and leaders.[23] Additionally, it combines elements of the other two hot
intelligences, personal and emotional intelligence. Personal intelligence being the
internal counterpart to social intelligence and emotional intelligence being the
capacity to understand emotions. The CSV highlights three social intelligence
measurement scales: Factor Based Social Intelligence Tasks, Psychological
Mindedness Assessment Procedure, and Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional
intelligence Test.[24]
Social Intelligence research is limited, however, there is much literature on the
characteristics associated with social intelligence. Zaccaro et al. found social
intelligence and perceptiveness to be integral to effective leadership; that is, good
leaders are “social experts.”[25] Emotional intelligence, too, plays a role in leadership.
Another study found that emotional intelligence enables leaders to better understand
their followers, thereby enhancing their ability to influence them. [26]

Human Mind vs. Animal Brain
Why So Different?
BY BRADFORD G. SCHLEIFER

Human beings possess a capability far beyond animals. Many ideas exist to explain the mind,
but few understand the truth.

Both evolutionists and religionists agree there is “something” about mankind that differs from
animals. Each offers explanations, certain the other side is wrong. How can you know which is
correct?
What is the human mind? How does it relate to the brain? Why do we not see animals with minds?
Most people do not understand the plain answers that have been available for thousands of years.
The argument can be summarized as the “mind-body problem.” It has been recognized that the
physical characteristics of the human brain do not warrant the extreme creative and processing power
that defines human ingenuity.
The answer is either physical or spiritual in nature—it can be explained no other way.

Unique to Humans

Consider just a few of the qualities man possesses that are unique among all living creatures. Many
attributes are so common and assumed that few give them much thought. Yet it should become clear
how special human beings are.
Ask yourself: Why does man have so many distinctive characteristics?

Self-consciousness: Beyond a simple recognition of self (as seen in a few animals), man can step
back and become a spectator, critic or admirer of the world around him. He is able to see his place in
the greater picture and analyze what needs to be done to affect his role.
Appreciation of beauty: Man is able to appreciate all kinds of beauty. This can be as simple as a
sunset, a work of art, or the intricate design of a flower.
For example, take someone to see New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art, and he will likely feel
emotionally moved by the seemingly limitless number of paintings and sculptures on display, dating
back hundreds of years. Take a dog to the same museum, and it will be more excited about the trip
and seeing the crowd of art lovers than anything else.
Humor: No other creature is able to appreciate, create and express humor. Not only does it require
creativity, but humor also requires the ability to detach oneself from one’s surroundings to see the
odd, surreal or ironic.
Awareness of death: While animals have a survival instinct, man is able to consider that he will one
day die. Aware that his days will not last forever, he has a deep respect of his mortality. In fact, nearly
all cultures perform some form of funeral ritual. This is not found in the animal world.
Understanding time: Animals are only able to relate time to themselves. They have no ability of
relating time to third parties. Humans can wonder, speculate and search the annals of history for
lessons, and apply those lessons to goals far into the future.
Connections between words: While animals can understand simple words or tones, they do not
comprehend syntax or communicate in complex sentences. Human beings have created hundreds of
languages (and thousands of dialects), even though they are born without any way in which to
communicate.
Meaning of life: The simple act of asking about life’s meaning and purpose makes man unique. No
animal contemplates its reason for living—nor would it be willing to live or die for specific values and
ideals.
Malleability: Humanity is able to adapt to its surroundings. We wear clothes, build shelters, and
modify our environments to suit our needs. While animals build homes for themselves, they do not
have the ability to live in an environment for which their bodies are not suited. Bring a polar bear to a
tropical rainforest or an elephant to the South Pole and they will not survive for long.
Lack of harmony with nature: When left alone, nature reaches homeostasis—it balances itself.
Only man has demonstrated he can disrupt that natural balance through means such as deforestation,
changing the course of rivers, pollution, over mining for resources, etc.

A sense of morality: Animals always take the path of least resistance. They do not have a
conscience or sense of right and wrong. On the other hand, mankind will go so far as to control his
thoughts based on what he considers right or wrong.
Character: This is the ability to know right from wrong, and turn from the wrong and do what is
right, even in the face of pressures and temptations. The desire to build character is only found in
man.
Free moral agency: Unlike animals, man can deviate from his course of thinking and living
however he sees fit. Animals react through instinct—programming.
Capacity for wisdom: Without the ability to place themselves in time, animals are unable to weigh
situations with previous experiences. While animals can develop behavioral patterns based on positive
or negative stimulation, they are completely unable to analyze actions before they are performed. This
ability, known as wisdom, is unique to human beings.
Desire for worship: No matter what part of the world or his culture, man exhibits a desire to seek,
follow and worship a higher power. Animals do not.
Love: While some animals form lifelong relationships for the purpose of reproduction, none exhibit a
parallel with the human characteristics of love, in which a couple shares experiences, goals, dreams,
hopes and aspirations.
The mind-body problem is a towering issue—one that dramatically separates us from the animal
world. There must be a reason the human mind is different from the animal brain.

Evolutionary Answer?

The mind is one subject most evolutionists will not engage. Simply put, the physical differences
between the human brain and that of animals are insufficient to explain the “horsepower” described
above. Two aspects of the human brain demonstrate this point.
Human beings do not have the heaviest brains in overall weight, or even weight in proportion to their
bodies.
Also, the nerve center of the human brain is only slightly more complex than that of animals.
No physiological explanation exists for man’s mind! Biologists have no irrefutable evolutionary
evidence. Psychologists are stupefied by the human brain. And evolutionists are left with only one
answer: There is no scientific answer to the mind-body problem!

Immortal Soul

If the differences between animals and human beings cannot be explained by physical means,
we must look for a spiritual explanation. Most professing Christians would quickly agree there must
be a spiritual aspect to the human condition. They commonly argue that this non-physical component
is an immortal soul. Those who support this approach try to use the Bible for proof.

Expand ImageSource:

Thinkstock

Certainly, if man had an immortal soul, this would help explain the immeasurable capacity of his
mind. But what does the Bible state?
The word “soul” appears in Scripture over 400 times, and for a variety of reasons. The first instance
occurs during the description of man’s creation. Notice Genesis 2: “And the LORD God formed man of
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul”
(vs. 7).
The wording here is important. Note that man became a “living soul.” The Hebrew word from which
“soul” was translated is nephesh, which means “a breathing creature.” This passage states that man
became a living, breathing creature.
But was the soul that man received different from that of animals in that it was immortal?
Again, allow the Bible to speak for itself: “The soul that sins, it shall DIE” (Ezek. 18:4, 20). If a soul
dies, then it cannot be immortal! How can so many believe that man has an immortal soul when just
two passages from God’s Word prove this to be absurd?
If the immortal soul does not come from Scripture, what is its origin? Even the briefest look at
historical records makes this plain: “The belief that the soul continues its existence after the
dissolution of the body is a matter of philosophical or theological speculation rather than of simple
faith, and is accordingly nowhere expressly taught in Holy Scripture…The belief in the immortality of
the soul came to the Jews from contact with Greek thought and chiefly through the philosophy of
Plato, its principal exponent, who was led to it through Orphic and Eleusinian mysteries in which
Babylonian and Egyptian views were strangely blended” (The Jewish Encyclopedia).
Early Catholic writer Tertullian (AD 155-220) detailed where the immortal soul doctrine had its roots:
“For some things are known even by nature: the immortality of the soul, for instance, is held by

many…I may use, therefore, the opinion of a Plato, when he declares, ‘Every soul is immortal’” (The
Ante-Nicene Fathers).
If the mind-body problem cannot be solved by professing Christianity’s immortal soul doctrine, then
what is the answer?

“Spirit in Man”

A biblical answer exists to the mind-body question, which has been missed by the masses. There is a
spiritual component to man that elevates him above the physical.
Notice a passage in the Old Testament: “The burden of the word of the LORD for Israel, says
the LORD, which stretches forth the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the
spirit of man within him” (Zech. 12:1). This clearly states that God created a spirit inside each human
being.
Proverbs 20:27 sheds some light on the purpose of this spirit: “The spirit of man is the candle of

the LORD, searching all the inward parts of the belly.”
God uses the spirit in man as a way to interface with humanity. This is further expounded in the book
of Job: “There is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding”
(32:8).
Putting these two passages together clarifies that God uses the “spirit in man” to impart
understanding. Through this spirit, God is able to teach physical man a degree of spiritual knowledge.
Yet he is still spiritually incomplete—he needs another spirit.

Physical and Spiritual

Man is a physical being with a spiritual component. For centuries, mankind has experienced awesome
progress and advancement, but—at the same time—continues to suffer ever-worsening and appalling
evils, troubles and ills. This is because its problems are spiritual in nature.
Great leaders have recognized the link between humanity’s problems and the need for spiritual
answers. General Douglas MacArthur, while attending the signing of Japan’s surrender on September
2, 1945, near the end of World War II, said, “Men since the beginning of time have sought
peace…Military Alliances, Balances of Power, Leagues of Nations, all in turn failed leaving the only
path to be by way of the crucible of war. The utter destructiveness of war now blots out this
alternative. We have had our last chance. If we do not devise some greater and more equitable system
Armageddon will be at our door. The problem basically is theological and involves a spiritual

recrudescence and improvement of human character that will synchronize with our almost matchless
advance in science, art, literature and all material and cultural developments of the past two thousand
years. It must be of the spirit if we are to save the flesh” (The Reports of General MacArthur).
Over 60 years have passed since General MacArthur uttered these words, yet problems worsen. Man is
desperate for spiritual knowledge—a solution to his problems.
Yet he must turn to God to learn HOW to resolve his deep-rooted problems. Again, man is spiritually
incomplete: he needs another spirit: “For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God” ( I Cor. 2:11).
God’s Spirit, when combined with our spirit, enables us to know “the things of God”—and to build
holy, righteous character.
The spirit in man also records the events, experiences and lessons in the life of each person, and it
returns to God when we die: “Then shall the dust [man] return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it” (Ecc. 12:7).
God then stores this vital ingredient of man until he is resurrected.
The human spirit allows man to reason, analyze and create. We are able to greatly exceed the
capability of animals because of this special, unique, spiritual component. The eye-opening fivepart World to Come broadcast series Does God Exist?—Many Absolute Proofs! (Part 1) presented
by Real Truth Editor-in-Chief David C. Pack expounds on the animal kingdom and the purpose of its
creation, which, without God involved, would not be possible. Be sure to watch it!
In addition, to learn more about humanity’s incredible future, including further proof of the mind of
man and its capacity for understanding, read The Awesome Potential of Man.

Viktor Frankl on the Human Search for Meaning
“Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms
— to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own
way.”
BY M ARI A P O P O V A

Celebrated Austrian psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor Viktor Frankl (March 26,
1905–September 2, 1997) remains best-known for his indispensable 1946
psychological memoir Man’s Search for Meaning(public library) — a mation on
what the gruesome experience of Auschwitz taught him about the primary purpose of
life: the quest for meaning, which sustained those who survived.
For Frankl, meaning came from three possible sources: purposeful work, love,
and courage in the face of difficulty.

In examining the “intensification of inner life” that helped prisoners stay alive, he
considers the transcendental power of love:
Love goes very far beyond the physical person of the beloved. It finds its deepest
meaning in his spiritual being, his inner self. Whether or not he is actually present,
whether or not he is still alive at all, ceases somehow to be of importance.
Frankl illustrates this with a stirring example of how his feelings for his wife — who
was eventually killed in the camps — gave him a sense of meaning:
We were at work in a trench. The dawn was grey around us; grey was the sky
above; grey the snow in the pale light of dawn; grey the rags in which my fellow
prisoners were clad, and grey their faces. I was again conversing silently with my
wife, or perhaps I was struggling to find the reason for my sufferings, my slow dying.
In a last violent protest against the hopelessness of imminent death, I sensed my
spirit piercing through the enveloping gloom. I felt it transcend that hopeless,
meaningless world, and from somewhere I heard a victorious “Yes” in answer to my
question of the existence of an ultimate purpose. At that moment a light was lit in a
distant farmhouse, which stood on the horizon as if painted there, in the midst of the
miserable grey of a dawning morning in Bavaria. “Et lux in tenebris lucet” — and the
light shineth in the darkness. For hours I stood hacking at the icy ground. The guard
passed by, insulting me, and once again I communed with my beloved. More and
more I felt that she was present, that she was with me; I had the feeling that I was
able to touch her, able to stretch out my hand and grasp hers. The feeling was very
strong: she was there. Then, at that very moment, a bird flew down silently and
perched just in front of me, on the heap of soil which I had dug up from the ditch, and
looked steadily at me.
Of humor, “another of the soul’s weapons in the fight for self-preservation,” Frankl
writes:
It is well known that humor, more than anything else in the human make-up, can
afford an aloofness and an ability to rise above any situation, even if only for a few
seconds. … The attempt to develop a sense of humor and to see things in a
humorous light is some kind of a trick learned while mastering the art of living. Yet it

is possible to practice the art of living even in a concentration camp, although
suffering is omnipresent.

Lithograph by Leo Haas, Holocaust artist who survived Theresienstadt and
Auschwitz (public domain)
After discussing the common psychological patterns that unfold in inmates, Frankl is
careful to challenge the assumption that human beings are invariably shaped by their
circumstances. He writes:
But what about human liberty? Is there no spiritual freedom in regard to behavior and
reaction to any given surroundings? … Most important, do the prisoners’ reactions to
the singular world of the concentration camp prove that man cannot escape the
influences of his surroundings? Does man have no choice of action in the face of
such circumstances?
We can answer these questions from experience as well as on principle. The
experiences of camp life show that man does have a choice of action. … Man can
preserve a vestige of spiritual freedom, of independence of mind, even in such
terrible conditions of psychic and physical stress.

Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms
— to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own
way.

Much like William James did in his treatise on habit, Frankl places this notion of
everyday choice at the epicentre of the human experience:
Every day, every hour, offered the opportunity to make a decision, a decision which
determined whether you would or would not submit to those powers which
threatened to rob you of your very self, your inner freedom; which determined
whether or not you would become the plaything of circumstance, renouncing
freedom and dignity to become molded into the form of the typical inmate.
Like Henry Miller and Philip K. Dick, Frankl recognizes suffering as an essential
piece not only of existence but of the meaningful life:
If there is a meaning in life at all, then there must be a meaning in suffering.
Suffering is an ineradicable part of life, even as fate and death. Without suffering and
death human life cannot be complete.

The way in which a man accepts his fate and all the suffering it entails, the way in
which he takes up his cross, gives him ample opportunity — even under the most
difficult circumstances — to add a deeper meaning to his life. It may remain brave,
dignified and unselfish. Or in the bitter fight for self-preservation he may forget his
human dignity and become no more than an animal. Here lies the chance for a man
either to make use of or to forgo the opportunities of attaining the moral values that a
difficult situation may afford him. And this decides whether he is worthy of his
sufferings or not. … Such men are not only in concentration camps. Everywhere
man is confronted with fate, with the chance of achieving something through his own
suffering.
In working as a psychiatrist to the inmates, Frankl found that the single most
important factor in cultivating the kind of “inner hold” that allowed men to survive was
teaching them to hold in the mind’s grip some future goal. He cites Nietzsche’s, who
wrote that “He who has a why to live for can bear with almost any how,” and
admonishes against generalization:
Woe to him who saw no more sense in his life, no aim, no purpose, and therefore no
point in carrying on. He was soon lost. The typical reply with which such a man
rejected all encouraging arguments was, “I have nothing to expect from life any
more.” What sort of answer can one give to that?
What was really needed was a fundamental change in our attitude toward life. We
had to learn ourselves and, furthermore, we had to teach the despairing men, that
it did not really matter what we expected from life, but rather what life expected from
us. We needed to stop asking about the meaning of life, and instead to think of
ourselves as those who were being questioned by life — daily and hourly. Our
answer must consist, not in talk and mation, but in right action and in right conduct.
Life ultimately means taking the responsibility to find the right answer to its problems
and to fulfill the tasks which it constantly sets for each individual.
These tasks, and therefore the meaning of life, differ from man to man, and from
moment to moment. Thus it is impossible to define the meaning of life in a general
way. Questions about the meaning of life can never be answered by sweeping
statements. “Life” does not mean something vague, but something very real and
concrete, just as life’s tasks are also very real and concrete. They form man’s

destiny, which is different and unique for each individual. No man and no destiny can
be compared with any other man or any other destiny. No situation repeats itself,
and each situation calls for a different response. Sometimes the situation in which a
man finds himself may require him to shape his own fate by action. At other times it
is more advantageous for him to make use of an opportunity for contemplation and
to realize assets in this way. Sometimes man may be required simply to accept fate,
to bear his cross. Every situation is distinguished by its uniqueness, and there is
always only one right answer to the problem posed by the situation at hand.

Lithograph by
Leo Haas, Holocaust artist who survived Theresienstadt and Auschwitz (public
domain)
In considering the human capacity for good and evil and the conditions that bring out
indecency in decent people, Frankl writes:
Human kindness can be found in all groups, even those which as a whole it would be
easy to condemn. The boundaries between groups overlapped and we must not try
to simplify matters by saying that these men were angels and those were devils.
From all this we may learn that there are two races of men in this world, but only
these two — the “race” of the decent man and the “race” of the indecent man. Both
are found everywhere; they penetrate into all groups of society. No group consists

entirely of decent or indecent people. In this sense, no group is of “pure race” — and
therefore one occasionally found a decent fellow among the camp guards.
Life in a concentration camp tore open the human soul and exposed its depths. Is it
surprising that in those depths we again found only human qualities which in their
very nature were a mixture of good and evil? The rift dividing good from evil, which
goes through all human beings, reaches into the lowest depths and becomes
apparent even on the bottom of the abyss which is laid open by the concentration
camp. The second half of the book presents Frankl’s singular style of existential
analysis, which he termed “logotherapy” — a method of healing the soul by
cultivating the capacity to find a meaningful life:
Ultimately, man should not ask what the meaning of his life is, but rather he must
recognize that it is he who is asked. In a word, each man is questioned by life; and
he can only answer to life by answering for his own life; to life he can only respond
by being responsible. Thus, logotherapy sees in responsibleness the very essence
of human existence.
This emphasis on responsibleness is reflected in the categorical imperative of
logotherapy, which is: “Live as if you were living already for the second time and as if
you had acted the first time as wrongly as you are about to act now!”
Frankl contributes to history’s richest definitions of love:
Love is the only way to grasp another human being in the innermost core of his
personality. No one can become fully aware of the very essence of another human
being unless he loves him. By his love he is enabled to see the essential traits and
features in the beloved person; and even more, he sees that which is potential in
him, which is not yet actualized but yet ought to be actualized. Furthermore, by his
love, the loving person enables the beloved person to actualize these potentialities.
By making him aware of what he can be and of what he should become, he makes
these potentialities come true.

Frankl wrote the book over the course of nine consecutive days, with the original
intention of publishing it anonymously, but upon his friends’ insistent advice, he
added his name in the last minute. In the introduction to the 1992 ion, in reflecting
upon the millions of copies sold in the half-century since the original publication,
Frankl makes a poignant meta-comment about something George Saunders recently
echoed, noting:
In the first place I do not at all see in the bestseller status of my book an
achievement and accomplishment on my part but rather an expression of the misery
of our time: if hundreds of thousands of people reach out for a book whose very title
promises to deal with the question of a meaning to life, it must be a question that
burns under their fingernails. … At first, however, it had been written with the
absolute conviction that, as an anonymous opus, it could never earn its author
literary fame.
In the same introduction, he shares a piece of timeless advice on success he often
gives his students:
Don’t aim at success — the more you aim at it and make it a target, the more you
are going to miss it. For success, like happiness, cannot be pursued; it must ensue,
and it only does so as the unintended side-effect of one’s dedication to a cause
greater than oneself or as the by-product of one’s surrender to a person other than
oneself. Happiness must happen, and the same holds for success: you have to let it
happen by not caring about it. I want you to listen to what your conscience
commands you to do and go on to carry it out to the best of your knowledge. Then
you will live to see that in the long run—in the long run, I say!—success will follow
you precisely because you had forgotten to think of it.

Humanism, humanity and faith
What does it mean to be human in a world of suffering?

Hearts & Minds Media 2017

What Humanism is a philosophical and ethical stance that emphasizes the value
and agency of human beings, individually and collectively, and generally
prefers critical thinking and evidence (rationalism, empiricism) over acceptance of
dogma or superstition. The meaning of the term humanism has fluctuated according
to the successive intellectual movements which have identified with it. [1] The term
was coined by theologian Friedrich Niethammer at the beginning of the 19th century.
Generally, however, humanism refers to a perspective that affirms some notion of
human freedom and progress. In modern times, humanist movements are typically
aligned with secularism, and today humanism typically refers to a non-theistic life
stance centred on human agency and looking to science rather than revelation from
a supernatural source to understand the world.

Historical perspectives on human nature
Ancient Orient
From the 3rd millennium Old Kingdom of Egypt, belief in the eternal afterlife of the
human Ka is documented. From the earliest times, man made out a claim of
dominance of humanity alongside radical pessimism because of the frailty and
brevity of human life (In the Hebrew Bible, for example, dominion of man is promised
in Genesis 1:28, but the author of Ecclesiastes bewails the vanity of all human
effort).[]
Classical antiquity
Protagoras made the famous claim that "Man is the measure of all things; of what is,
that it is; of what is not, that it is not". Socrates advocated for all humans to "know
thyself", and gave the (doubtlessly tongue-in-cheek) definition of humans as
"featherless bipeds" (Plato, Politicus). More serious is Aristotle's description of man
as the "communal animal" (ζῶον πολιτικόν), i.e., emphasizing society-building as a
central trait of human nature, and "thought bearer animal" (ζῶον λόγον ἔχον, animal
rationale)[], a term that also inspired the species' taxonomy, Homo sapiens.[]
Middle Ages
The dominant world-view of medieval Europe, as directed by the Catholic Church,
was that human existence is essentially good and created in "original grace", but
because of concupiscence, is marred by sin, and that its aim should be to focus on
the beatific vision after death. The 13th century pope Innocent III wrote about the
essential misery of earthly existence in his "On the misery of the human condition" –
a view that was disputed by, for example, Gianozzo Manetti in his treatise "On
human dignity."[]

Renaissance]
A famous quote of Shakespeare's Hamlet (II, ii, 115-117), expressing the contrast of
human physical beauty, intellectual faculty, and ephemeral nature:

What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! how infinite in faculties!
in form and moving, how express and admirable! in action how like an angel!
in apprehension, how like a god! the beauty of the world! the paragon of
animals! And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust?
René Descartes famously and succinctly proposed: Cogito ergo sum[2] (French:
"Je pense donc je suis"; English: "I think, therefore I am")[3]
Modern era
The Enlightenment was driven by a renewed conviction, that, in the words
of Immanuel Kant, "Man is distinguished above all animals by his selfconsciousness, by which he is a 'rational animal'." In the 19th century, Karl
Marx defined man as "labouring animal" (animal laborans) in conscious
opposition to this tradition. In the early 20th century, Sigmund Freud dealt a
serious blow to positivism by postulating that human behaviour is to a large part
controlled by the unconscious mind

Roughly speaking, the word humanist has come to mean someone who:
•

trusts to the scientific method when it comes to understanding how the
universe works and rejects the idea of the supernatural (and is therefore an
atheist or agnostic)

•

makes their ethical decisions based on reason, empathy, and a concern for
human beings and other sentient animals

•

believes that, in the absence of an afterlife and any discernible purpose to the
universe, human beings can act to give their own lives meaning by seeking
happiness in this life and helping others to do the same.

However, definitions abound and there are longer and shorter versions. The fullest
definition to have a measure of international agreement is contained in the
2002 Amsterdam Declaration of the International humanist and Ethical Union. Some
others include:

…a commitment to the perspective, interests and centrality of human persons; a
belief in reason and autonomy as foundational aspects of human existence; a belief
that reason, scepticism and the scientific method are the only appropriate
instruments for discovering truth and structuring the human community; a belief that
the foundations for ethics and society are to be found in autonomy and moral
equality…
– Concise Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
An appeal to reason in contrast to revelation or religious authority as a means of
finding out about the natural world and destiny of man, and also giving a grounding
for morality…Humanist ethics is also distinguished by placing the end of moral action
in the welfare of humanity rather than in fulfilling the will of God.
– Oxford Companion to Philosophy
Believing that it is possible to live confidently without metaphysical or religious
certainty and that all opinions are open to revision and correction, [Humanists] see
human flourishing as dependent on open communication, discussion, criticism and
unforced consensus.
– Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy
That man should show respect to man, irrespective of class, race or creed is
fundamental to the humanist attitude to life. Among the fundamental moral principles,
he would count those of freedom, justice, tolerance and happiness…the attitude that
people can live an honest, meaningful life without following a formal religious creed.
– Pears Cyclopaedia, 87th ion, 1978
Rejection of religion in favour of the advancement of humanity by its own efforts.
– Collins Concise Dictionary
A non-religious philosophy, based on liberal human values.
– Little Oxford Dictionary

(REF from Humanism.org.uk, 2017)
Background
The word "Humanism" is ultimately derived from the Latin concept humanitas, and,
like most other words ending in -ism, entered English in the nineteenth century.
However, historians agree that the concept predates the label invented to describe it,
encompassing the various meanings ascribed to humanitas, which included both
benevolence toward one's fellow humans and the values imparted by bonae
litterae or humane learning (literally "good letters").
In the second century AD, a Latin grammarian, Aulus Gellius (c. 125 – c. 180),
complained:
Those who have spoken Latin and have used the language correctly do not give to
the word humanitas the meaning which it is commonly thought to have, namely, what
the Greeks call φιλανθρωπία (philanthropy), signifying a kind of friendly spirit and
good-feeling towards all men without distinction; but they gave to humanitasthe force
of the Greek παιδεία (paideia); that is, what we call eruditionem institutionemque in
bonas artes, or "education and training in the liberal arts". Those who earnestly
desire and seek after these are most highly humanized. For the desire to pursue of
that kind of knowledge, and the training given by it, has been granted to humanity
alone of all the animals, and for that reason it is termed humanitas, or "humanity".[4]
Gellius says that in his day humanitas is commonly used as a synonym
for philanthropy – or kindness and benevolence toward one's fellow human beings.
Gellius maintains that this common usage is wrong, and that model writers of Latin,
such as Cicero and others, used the word only to mean what we might call "humane"
or "polite" learning, or the Greek equivalent Paideia. Yet in seeking to restrict the
meaning of humanitas to literary education this way, Gellius was not advocating a
retreat from political engagement into some ivory tower, though it might look like that
to us. He himself was involved in public affairs. According to legal historian Richard
Bauman, Gellius was a judge as well as a grammarian and was an active participant
the great contemporary debate on harsh punishments that accompanied the legal
reforms of Antoninus Pius (one these reforms, for example, was that a prisoner was
not to be treated as guilty before being tried). "By assigning pride of place to Paideia

in his comment on the etymology of humanitas, Gellius implies that the trained mind
is best equipped to handle the problems troubling society."[5]
Gellius's writings fell into obscurity during the middle ages, but during the Italian
Renaissance, Gellius became a favorite author. Teachers and scholars of Greek and
Latin grammar, rhetoric, philosophy, and poetry were called and called themselves
"humanists".[6][7] Modern scholars, however, point out that Cicero (106 – 43 BCE),
who was most responsible for defining and popularizing the term humanitas, in fact
frequently used the word in both senses, as did his near contemporaries. For Cicero,
a lawyer, what most distinguished humans from brutes was speech, which, allied to
reason, could (and should) enable them to settle disputes and live together in
concord and harmony under the rule of law.[8] Thus humanitas included two
meanings from the outset and these continue in the modern derivative, humanism,
which even today can refer to both humanitarian benevolence and to a method of
study and debate involving an accepted group of authors and a careful and accurate
use of language.[9]
During the French Revolution, and soon after, in Germany (by the Left
Hegelians), humanism began to refer to an ethical philosophy centered on
humankind, without attention to the transcendent or supernatural. The
designation Religious Humanism refers to organized groups that sprang up during
the late-nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It is similar to Protestantism,
although centered on human needs, interests, and abilities rather than the
supernatural.[10] In the Anglophone world, such modern, organized forms of
humanism, which are rooted in the 18th-century Enlightenment, have to a
considerable extent more or less detached themselves from the historic connection
of humanism with classical learning and the liberal arts.
The first Humanist Manifesto was issued by a conference held at the University of
Chicago in 1933.[11] Signatories included the philosopher John Dewey, but the
majority were ministers (chiefly Unitarian) and theologians. They identified humanism
as an ideology that espouses reason, ethics, and social and economic justice, and
they called for science to replace dogma and the supernatural as the basis
of morality and decision-making.[12][13]
History

An ideal society as conceived by Renaissance humanist Saint Thomas More in his
book Utopia
In 1808 Bavarian educational commissioner Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer coined
the term Humanismus to describe the new classical curriculum he planned to offer in
German secondary schools,[14] and by 1836 the word "humanism" had been
absorbed into the English language in this sense. The coinage gained universal
acceptance in 1856, when German historian and philologist Georg
Voigt used humanism to describe Renaissance humanism, the movement that
flourished in the Italian Renaissance to revive classical learning, a use which won
wide acceptance among historians in many nations, especially Italy.[15]
But in the mid-18th century, during the French Enlightenment, a more ideological use
of the term had come into use. In 1765, the author of an anonymous article in a
French Enlightenment periodical spoke of "The general love of humanity ... a virtue
hitherto quite nameless among us, and which we will venture to call 'humanism', for
the time has come to create a word for such a beautiful and necessary thing". [16] The
latter part of the 18th and the early 19th centuries saw the creation of numerous
grass-roots "philanthropic" and benevolent societies dedicated to human betterment
and the spreading of knowledge (some Christian, some not). After the French
Revolution, the idea that human virtue could be created by human reason alone
independently from traditional religious institutions, attributed by opponents of the
Revolution to Enlightenment philosophes such as Rousseau, was violently attacked

by influential religious and political conservatives, such as Edmund
Burke and Joseph de Maistre, as a deification or idolatry of humanity.[17] Humanism
began to acquire a negative sense. The Oxford English Dictionary records the use of
the word "humanism" by an English clergyman in 1812 to indicate those who believe
in the "mere humanity" (as opposed to the divine nature) of Christ,
i.e., Unitarians and Deists.[18] In this polarised atmosphere, in which established
ecclesiastical bodies tended to circle the wagons and reflexively oppose political and
social reforms like extending the franchise, universal schooling, and the like, liberal
reformers and radicals embraced the idea of Humanism as an alternative religion of
humanity. The anarchist Proudhon (best known for declaring that "property is theft")
used the word "humanism" to describe a "culte, déification de l’humanité" ("worship,
deification of humanity") and Ernest Renan in L’avenir de la science: pensées de
1848 ("The Future of Knowledge: Thoughts on 1848") (1848–49), states: "It is my
deep conviction that pure humanism will be the religion of the future, that is, the cult
of all that pertains to humanity—all of life, sanctified and raised to the level of a moral
value."[19]
At about the same time, the word "humanism" as a philosophy centred on
humankind (as opposed to institutionalised religion) was also being used in Germany
by the so-called Left Hegelians, Arnold Ruge, and Karl Marx, who were critical of the
close involvement of the church in the German government. There has been a
persistent confusion between the several uses of the terms:[1] philanthropic
humanists look to what they consider their antecedents in critical thinking and
human-centered philosophy among the Greek philosophers and the great figures of
Renaissance history; and scholarly humanists stress the linguistic and cultural
disciplines needed to understand and interpret these philosophers and artists.
Predecessors
Ancient South Asia
Human-centered philosophy that rejected the supernatural may also be found circa
1500 BCE in the Lokayata system of Indian philosophy. Nasadiya Sukta, a passage
in the Rig Veda, contains one of the first recorded assertions of agnosticism. In the
6th-century BCE, Gautama Buddha expressed, in Pali literature a skeptical attitude
toward the supernatural:[20]

Since neither soul, nor aught belonging to soul, can really and truly exist, the view
which holds that this I who am 'world', who am 'soul', shall hereafter live permanent,
persisting, unchanging, yea abide eternally: is not this utterly and entirely a foolish
doctrine?
Another instance of ancient humanism as an organised system of thought is found in
the Gathas of Zarathustra, composed between 1,000 BCE – 600 BCE[21] in Greater
Iran. Zarathustra's philosophy in the Gathas lays out a conception of humankind as
thinking beings, dignified with choice and agency according to the intellect which
each receives from Ahura Mazda (God in the form of supreme wisdom). The idea of
Ahura Mazda as a non-intervening deistic god or Great Architect of the Universe was
combined with a unique eschatology and ethical system which implied that each
person is held morally responsible in the afterlife, for their choices they freely made
in life.[22] This importance placed upon thought, action and personal responsibility,
and the concept of a non-intervening creator, was a source of inspiration to a
number of Enlightenment humanist thinkers in Europe such
as Voltaire and Montesquieu.
Ancient China
Main article: Chinese philosophy
In China, Yellow Emperor is regarded as the humanistic primogenitor.[] Sage kings
such as Yao and Shun are humanistic figures as recorded.[] King Wu of Zhou has
the famous saying: "Humanity is the Ling (efficacious essence) of the world (among
all)." Among them Duke of Zhou, respected as a founder of Rujia (Confucianism), is
especially prominent and pioneering in humanistic thought. His words were recorded
in the Book of History as follows (translation):[]
What the people desire, Heaven certainly complies?
Heaven (or "God") is not believable. Our Tao (special term referring to "the way of
nature") includes morality (derived from the philosophy of former sage kings and to
be continued forward).
In the 6th century BCE, Taoist teacher Lao Tzu espoused a series
of naturalistic concepts with some elements of humanistic philosophy. The Silver
Rule of Confucianism from Analects XV.24, is an example of ethical philosophy
based on human values rather than the supernatural. Humanistic thought is also

contained in other Confucian classics, e.g., as recorded in Zuo Zhuan, Ji Liang says,
"People is the zhu (master, lord, dominance, owner or origin) of gods. So, to sage
kings, people first, gods second"; Neishi Guo says, "Gods, clever, righteous and
wholehearted, comply with human." Taoist and Confucian secularism contain
elements of moral thought devoid of religious authority or deism however they only
partly resembled our modern concept of secularism.
Ancient Greece
6th-century BCE pre-Socratic Greek philosophers Thales of
Miletus and Xenophanes of Colophon were the first in the region to attempt to
explain the world in terms of human reason rather than myth and tradition, thus can
be said to be the first Greek humanists. Thales questioned the notion of
anthropomorphic gods and Xenophanes refused to recognise the gods of his time
and reserved the divine for the principle of unity in the universe. These Ionian
Greeks were the first thinkers to assert that nature is available to be studied
separately from the supernatural realm. Anaxagoras brought philosophy and the
spirit of rational inquiry from Ionia to Athens. Pericles, the leader of Athens during the
period of its greatest glory was an admirer of Anaxagoras. Other influential preSocratics or rational philosophers include Protagoras (like Anaxagoras a friend of
Pericles), known for his famous dictum "man is the measure of all things"
and Democritus, who proposed that matter was composed of atoms. Little of the
written work of these early philosophers survives and they are known mainly from
fragments and quotations in other writers, principally Plato and Aristotle. The
historian Thucydides, noted for his scientific and rational approach to history, is also
much admired by later humanists.[23] In the 3rd century BCE, Epicurus became
known for his concise phrasing of the problem of evil, lack of belief in the afterlife,
and human-centred approaches to achieving eudaimonia. He was also the first
Greek philosopher to admit women to his school as a rule.
Medieval Islam
Many medieval Muslim thinkers pursued humanistic, rational and
scientific discourses in their search for knowledge, meaning and values. A wide
range of Islamic writings on love, poetry, history and philosophical theology show

that medieval Islamic thought was open to the humanistic ideas of individualism,
occasional secularism, skepticism, and liberalism.[24]
According to Imad-ad-Dean Ahmad, another reason the Islamic world flourished
during the Middle Ages was an early emphasis on freedom of speech, as
summarised by al-Hashimi (a cousin of Caliph al-Ma'mun) in the following letter to
one of the religious opponents he was attempting to convert through reason:[25]
Bring forward all the arguments you wish and say whatever you please and speak
your mind freely. Now that you are safe and free to say whatever you please appoint
some arbitrator who will impartially judge between us and lean only towards the truth
and be free from the empery of passion, and that arbitrator shall be Reason,
whereby God makes us responsible for our own rewards and punishments. Herein I
have dealt justly with you and have given you full security and am ready to accept
whatever decision Reason may give for me or against me. For "There is no
compulsion in religion" (Qur'an 2:256) and I have only invited you to accept our faith
willingly and of your own accord and have pointed out the hideousness of your
present belief. Peace be with you and the blessings of God!
According to George Makdisi, certain aspects of Renaissance humanism has its
roots in the medieval Islamic world, including the "art of dictation, called in Latin, ars
dictaminis", and "the humanist attitude toward classical language".[26]

Renaissance

Portrait of Petrarch painted in 1376

Renaissance humanism was an intellectual movement in Europe of the later Middle
Ages and the Early Modern period. The 19th-century German historian Georg
Voigt (1827–91) identified Petrarch as the first Renaissance humanist. Paul
Johnson agrees that Petrarch was "the first to put into words the notion that the
centuries between the fall of Rome and the present had been the age of Darkness".
According to Petrarch, what was needed to remedy this situation was the careful
study and imitation of the great classical authors. For Petrarch and Boccaccio, the
greatest master was Cicero, whose prose became the model for both learned (Latin)
and vernacular (Italian) prose.
Once the language was mastered grammatically it could be used to attain the
second stage, eloquence or rhetoric. This art of persuasion [Cicero had held] was
not art for its own sake, but the acquisition of the capacity to persuade others – all
men and women – to lead the good life. As Petrarch put it, 'it is better to will the good
than to know the truth'. Rhetoric thus led to and embraced philosophy. Leonardo
Bruni (c. 1369–1444), the outstanding scholar of the new generation, insisted that it
was Petrarch who "opened the way for us to show how to acquire learning", but it
was in Bruni's time that the word umanista first came into use, and its subjects of
study were listed as five: grammar, rhetoric, poetry, moral philosophy, and
history".[27]

Coluccio Salutati, Chancellor of Florence and disciple of Petrarch (1331–1406)

The basic training of the humanist was to speak well and write (typically, in the form
of a letter). One of Petrarch's followers, Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406) was made
chancellor of Florence, "whose interests he defended with his literary skill. The
Visconti of Milan claimed that Salutati’s pen had done more damage than 'thirty
squadrons of Florentine cavalry'".[28]

Poggio Bracciolini (1380–1459), an early Renaissance humanist, book collector, and
reformer of script, who served as papal secretary[29]
Contrary to a still widely held interpretation that originated in Voigt's celebrated
contemporary, Jacob Burckhardt,[30] and which was adopted wholeheartedly –
especially by modern thinkers calling themselves "humanists" – [31] most specialists
today do not characterise Renaissance humanism as a philosophical movement, nor
in any way as anti-Christian or even anti-clerical. A modern historian has this to say:
Humanism was not an ideological programme but a body of literary knowledge and
linguistic skill based on the "revival of good letters", which was a revival of a lateantique philology and grammar, This is how the word "humanist" was understood by
contemporaries, and if scholars would agree to accept the word in this sense rather
than in the sense in which it was used in the nineteenth century we might be spared
a good deal of useless argument. That humanism had profound social and even
political consequences of the life of Italian courts is not to be doubted. But the idea
that as a movement it was in some way inimical to the Church, or to the conservative
social order in general is one that has been put forward for a century and more
without any substantial proof being offered.

The nineteenth-century historian Jacob Burckhardt, in his classic work, The
Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, noted as a "curious fact" that some men of
the new culture were "men of the strictest piety, or even ascetics". If he had mated
more deeply on the meaning of the careers of such humanists as Abrogio Traversari
(1386–1439), the General of the Camaldolese Order, perhaps he would not have
gone on to describe humanism in unqualified terms as "pagan", and thus helped
precipitate a century of infertile debate about the possible existence of something
called "Christian humanism" which ought to be opposed to "pagan humanism".
— Peter Partner, Renaissance Rome, Portrait of a Society 1500–1559 (University of
California Press 1979) pp. 14–15.
The umanisti criticised what they considered the barbarous Latin of the universities,
but the revival of the humanities largely did not conflict with the teaching of traditional
university subjects, which went on as before.[32]
Nor did the humanists view themselves as in conflict with Christianity. Some, like
Salutati, were the Chancellors of Italian cities, but the majority (including Petrarch)
were ordained as priests, and many worked as senior officials of the Papal court.
Humanist Renaissance popes Nicholas V, Pius II, Sixtus IV, and Leo X wrote books
and amassed huge libraries.[33]
In the high Renaissance, in fact, there was a hope that more direct knowledge of the
wisdom of antiquity, including the writings of the Church fathers, the earliest known
Greek texts of the Christian Gospels, and in some cases even the Jewish Kabbalah,
would initiate a harmonious new era of universal agreement.[34] With this end in view,
Renaissance Church authorities afforded humanists what in retrospect appears a
remarkable degree of freedom of thought.[35][36] One humanist, the Greek
Orthodox Platonist Gemistus Pletho(1355–1452), based in Mystras, Greece (but in
contact with humanists in Florence, Venice, and Rome) taught a Christianised
version of pagan polytheism.[37]
Back to the sources

Portrait of Erasmus of Rotterdam
The humanists' close study of Latin literary texts soon enabled them to discern
historical differences in the writing styles of different periods. By analogy with what
they saw as decline of Latin, they applied the principle of ad fontes, or back to the
sources, across broad areas of learning, seeking out manuscripts
of Patristic literature as well as pagan authors. In 1439, while employed in Naples at
the court of Alfonso V of Aragon (at the time engaged in a dispute with the Papal
States) the humanist Lorenzo Valla used stylistic textual analysis, now
called philology, to prove that the Donation of Constantine, which purported to confer
temporal powers on the Pope of Rome, was an 8th-century forgery.[38] For the next
70 years, however, neither Valla nor any of his contemporaries thought to apply the
techniques of philology to other controversial manuscripts in this way. Instead, after
the fall of the Byzantine Empire to the Turks in 1453, which brought a flood of Greek
Orthodox refugees to Italy, humanist scholars increasingly turned to the study
of Neoplatonism and Hermeticism, hoping to bridge the differences between the
Greek and Roman Churches, and even between Christianity itself and the nonChristian world.[39] The refugees brought with them Greek manuscripts, not only of
Plato and Aristotle, but also of the Christian Gospels, previously unavailable in the
Latin West.
After 1517, when the new invention of printing made these texts widely available, the
Dutch humanist Erasmus, who had studied Greek at the Venetian printing house
of Aldus Manutius, began a philological analysis of the Gospels in the spirit of Valla,

comparing the Greek originals with their Latin translations with a view to correcting
errors and discrepancies in the latter. Erasmus, along with the French
humanist Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples, began issuing new translations, laying the
groundwork for the Protestant Reformation. Henceforth Renaissance humanism,
particularly in the German North, became concerned with religion, while Italian and
French humanism concentrated increasingly on scholarship and philology addressed
to a narrow audience of specialists, studiously avoiding topics that might offend
despotic rulers or which might be seen as corrosive of faith. After the Reformation,
critical examination of the Bible did not resume until the advent of the socalled Higher criticism of the 19th-century German Tübingen school.
Consequences
The ad fontes principle also had many applications. The re-discovery of ancient
manuscripts brought a more profound and accurate knowledge of ancient
philosophical schools such as Epicureanism, and Neoplatonism, whose Pagan
wisdom the humanists, like the Church fathers of old, tended, at least initially, to
consider as deriving from divine revelation and thus adaptable to a life of Christian
virtue.[40] The line from a drama of Terence, Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum
puto (or with nil for nihil), meaning "I am a human being, I think nothing human alien
to me",[41] known since antiquity through the endorsement of Saint Augustine, gained
renewed currency as epitomising the humanist attitude. The statement, in a play
modeled or borrowed from a (now lost) Greek comedy by Menander, may have
originated in a lighthearted vein – as a comic rationale for an old man's
meddling – but it quickly became a proverb and throughout the ages was quoted with
a deeper meaning, by Cicero and Saint Augustine, to name a few, and most notably
by Seneca. Richard Bauman writes:
Homo sum: humani nihil a me alienum puto., I am a human being: and I deem
nothing pertaining to humanity is foreign to me.
The words of the comic playwright P. Terentius Afer reverberated across the Roman
world of the mid-2nd century BCE and beyond. Terence, an African and a former
slave, was well placed to preach the message of universalism, of the essential unity
of the human race, that had come down in philosophical form from the Greeks, but
needed the pragmatic muscles of Rome in order to become a practical reality. The

influence of Terence's felicitous phrase on Roman thinking about human rights can
hardly be overestimated. Two hundred years later Seneca ended his seminal
exposition of the unity of humankind with a clarion-call:
There is one short rule that should regulate human relationships. All that you see,
both divine and human, is one. We are parts of the same great body. Nature created
us from the same source and to the same end. She imbued us with mutual affection
and sociability, she taught us to be fair and just, to suffer injury rather than to inflict it.
She bid us extend our hands to all in need of help. Let that well-known line be in our
heart and on our lips: Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto." [42]
Better acquaintance with Greek and Roman technical writings also influenced the
development of European science (see the history of science in the Renaissance).
This was despite what A. C. Crombie (viewing the Renaissance in the 19th-century
manner as a chapter in the heroic March of Progress) calls "a backwards-looking
admiration for antiquity", in which Platonism stood in opposition to
the Aristotelian concentration on the observable properties of the physical
world.[43] But Renaissance humanists, who considered themselves as restoring the
glory and nobility of antiquity, had no interest in scientific innovation. However, by the
mid-to-late 16th century, even the universities, though still dominated by
Scholasticism, began to demand that Aristotle be read in accurate texts ed according
to the principles of Renaissance philology, thus setting the stage for Galileo's
quarrels with the outmoded habits of Scholasticism.
Just as artist and inventor Leonardo da Vinci – partaking of the zeitgeist though not
himself a humanist – advocated study of human anatomy, nature, and weather to
enrich Renaissance works of art, so Spanish-born humanist Juan Luis Vives (c.
1493–1540) advocated observation, craft, and practical techniques to improve the
formal teaching of Aristotelian philosophy at the universities, helping to free them
from the grip of Medieval Scholasticism.[44] Thus, the stage was set for the adoption
of an approach to natural philosophy, based on empirical observations and
experimentation of the physical universe, making possible the advent of the age of
scientific inquiry that followed the Renaissance.[45]
It was in education that the humanists' program had the most lasting results, their
curriculum and methods:

were followed everywhere, serving as models for the Protestant Reformers as well
as the Jesuits. The humanistic school, animated by the idea that the study of
classical languages and literature provided valuable information and intellectual
discipline as well as moral standards and a civilised taste for future rulers, leaders,
and professionals of its society, flourished without interruption, through many
significant changes, until our own century, surviving many religious, political and
social revolutions. It has but recently been replaced, though not yet completely, by
other more practical and less demanding forms of education.[46]
From Renaissance to modern humanism
Early humanists saw no conflict between reason and their Christian faith
(see Christian Humanism). They inveighed against the abuses of the Church, but not
against the Church itself, much less against religion. For them, the
word "secular" carried no connotations of disbelief – that would come later, in the
nineteenth century. In the Renaissance to be secular meant simply to be in the world
rather than in a monastery. Petrarch frequently admitted that his brother Gherardo's
life as a Carthusian monk was superior to his own (although Petrarch himself was
in Minor Orders and was employed by the Church all his life). He hoped that he
could do some good by winning earthly glory and praising virtue, inferior though that
might be to a life devoted solely to prayer. By embracing a non-theistic philosophic
base,[47] however, the methods of the humanists, combined with their eloquence,
would ultimately have a corrosive effect on established authority.
Yet it was from the Renaissance that modern Secular Humanism grew, with the
development of an important split between reason and religion. This occurred as the
church's complacent authority was exposed in two vital areas. In science, Galileo's
support of the Copernican revolution upset the church's adherence to the theories of
Aristotle, exposing them as false. In theology, the Dutch scholar Erasmus with his
new Greek text showed that the Roman Catholic adherence to Jerome's Vulgate was
frequently in error. A tiny wedge was thus forced between reason and authority, as
both of them were then understood.[48]
For some, this meant turning back to the Bible as the source of authority instead of
the Catholic Church, for others it was a split from theism altogether. This was the
main divisive line between the Reformation and the Renaissance,[49] which dealt with

the same basic problems, supported the same science based on reason and
empirical research, but had a different set of presuppositions (theistic versus
naturalistic).[47]
19th and 20th centuries
The phrase the "religion of humanity" is sometimes attributed to American Founding
Father Thomas Paine, though as yet unattested in his surviving writings. According
to Tony Davies:
Paine called himself a theophilanthropist, a word combining the Greek for "God",
"love", and "humanity", and indicating that while he believed in the existence of a
creating intelligence in the universe, he entirely rejected the claims made by and for
all existing religious doctrines, especially their miraculous, transcendental and
salvationist pretensions. The Parisian "Society of Theophilanthropy" which he
sponsored, is described by his biographer as "a forerunner of the ethical and
humanist societies that proliferated later" ... [Paine's book] the trenchantly witty Age
of Reason (1793) ... pours scorn on the supernatural pretensions of scripture,
combining Voltairean mockery with Paine's own style of taproom ridicule to expose
the absurdity of a theology built on a collection of incoherent Levantine folktales. [50]
Davies identifies Paine's The Age of Reason as "the link between the two major
narratives of what Jean-François Lyotard[51] calls the narrative of legitimation": the
rationalism of the 18th-century Philosophes and the radical, historically based
German 19th-century Biblical criticism of the Hegelians David Friedrich
Strauss and Ludwig Feuerbach. "The first is political, largely French in inspiration,
and projects 'humanity as the hero of liberty'. The second is philosophical, German,
seeks the totality and autonomy of knowledge, and stresses understanding rather
than freedom as the key to human fulfilment and emancipation. The two themes
converged and competed in complex ways in the 19th century and beyond, and
between them set the boundaries of its various humanisms.[52] Homo homini deus
est ("The human being is a god to humanity" or "god is nothing [other than] the
human being to himself"), Feuerbach had written.[53]
Victorian novelist Mary Ann Evans, known to the world as George Eliot, translated
Strauss's Das Leben Jesu ("The Life of Jesus", 1846) and Ludwig Feuerbach's Das
Wesen Christianismus ("The Essence of Christianity"). She wrote to a friend:

the fellowship between man and man which has been the principle of development,
social and moral, is not dependent on conceptions of what is not man ... the idea of
God, so far as it has been a high spiritual influence, is the ideal of goodness entirely
human (i.e., an exaltation of the human).[54]
Eliot and her circle, who included her companion George Henry Lewes (the
biographer of Goethe) and the abolitionist and social theorist Harriet Martineau, were
much influenced by the positivism of Auguste Comte, whom Martineau had
translated. Comte had proposed an atheistic culte founded on human principles – a
secular Religion of Humanity (which worshiped the dead, since most humans who
have ever lived are dead), complete with holidays and liturgy, modeled on the rituals
of what was seen as a discred and dilapidated Catholicism.[55] Although Comte's
English followers, like Eliot and Martineau, for the most part rejected the full gloomy
panoply of his system, they liked the idea of a religion of humanity. Comte's austere
vision of the universe, his injunction to "vivre pour altrui" ("live for others", from which
comes the word "altruism"),[56] and his idealisation of women inform the works of
Victorian novelists and poets from George Eliot and Matthew Arnold to Thomas
Hardy.
The British Humanistic Religious Association was formed as one of the earliest
forerunners of contemporary chartered Humanist organisations in 1853 in London.
This early group was democratically organised, with male and female members
participating in the election of the leadership, and promoted knowledge of the
sciences, philosophy, and the arts.[57]
In February 1877, the word was used pejoratively, apparently for the first time in
America, to describe Felix Adler. Adler, however, did not embrace the term, and
instead coined the name "Ethical Culture" for his new movement – a movement
which still exists in the now Humanist-affiliated New York Society for Ethical
Culture.[58] In 2008, Ethical Culture Leaders wrote: "Today, the historic identification,
Ethical Culture, and the modern description, Ethical Humanism, are used
interchangeably."[59]
Active in the early 1920s, F.C.S. Schiller labelled his work "humanism" but for
Schiller the term referred to the pragmatist philosophy he shared with William James.
In 1929, Charles Francis Potter founded the First Humanist Society of New York

whose advisory board included Julian Huxley, John Dewey, Albert
Einstein and Thomas Mann. Potter was a minister from the Unitarian tradition and in
1930 he and his wife, Clara Cook Potter, published Humanism: A New Religion.
Throughout the 1930s, Potter was an advocate of such liberal causes as, women’s
rights, access to birth control, "civil divorce laws", and an end to capital
punishment.[60]
Raymond B. Bragg, the associate or of The New Humanist, sought to consolidate
the input of Leon Milton Birkhead, Charles Francis Potter, and several members of
the Western Unitarian Conference. Bragg asked Roy Wood Sellars to draft a
document based on this information which resulted in the publication of the Humanist
Manifesto in 1933. Potter's book and the Manifesto became the cornerstones of
modern humanism, the latter declaring a new religion by saying, "any religion that
can hope to be a synthesising and dynamic force for today must be shaped for the
needs of this age. To establish such a religion is a major necessity of the present." It
then presented 15 theses of humanism as foundational principles for this new
religion.
In 1941, the American Humanist Association was organised. Noted members of The
AHA included Isaac Asimov, who was the president from 1985 until his death in
1992, and writer Kurt Vonnegut, who followed as honorary president until his death
in 2007. Gore Vidal became honorary president in 2009. Robert Buckman was the
head of the association in Canada, and is now an honorary president. []
After World War II, three prominent Humanists became the first directors of major
divisions of the United Nations: Julian Huxley of UNESCO, Brock Chisholm of
the World Health Organisation, and John Boyd-Orr of the Food and Agricultural
Organisation.[61]
In 2004, American Humanist Association, along with other groups representing
agnostics, atheists, and other freethinkers, joined to create the Secular Coalition for
America which advocates in Washington, D.C., for separation of church and
state and nationally for the greater acceptance of nontheistic Americans. The
Executive Director of Secular Coalition for America is Sean Faircloth, a long-time
state legislator from Maine.
Types

Scholarly tradition
Renaissance humanists
"Renaissance humanism" is the name later given to a tradition of cultural and
educational reform engaged in by civic and ecclesiastical chancellors, book
collectors, educators, and writers, who by the late fifteenth century began to be
referred to as umanisti – "humanists".[6] It developed during the fourteenth and the
beginning of the fifteenth centuries, and was a response to the challenge of
scholastic university education, which was then dominated by Aristotelian philosophy
and logic. Scholasticism focused on preparing men to be doctors, lawyers or
professional theologians, and was taught from approved textbooks in logic, natural
philosophy, medicine, law and theology.[62] There were important centres of
humanism at Florence, Naples, Rome, Venice, Mantua, Ferrara, and Urbino.
Humanists reacted against this utilitarian approach and the narrow pedantry
associated with it. They sought to create a citizenry (frequently including women)
able to speak and write with eloquence and clarity and thus capable of engaging the
civic life of their communities and persuading others to virtuous and prudent actions.
This was to be accomplished through the study of the studia humanitatis, today
known as the humanities: grammar, rhetoric, history, poetry and moral
philosophy.[63] As a program to revive the cultural – and particularly the
literary – legacy and moral philosophy of classical antiquity, Humanism was a
pervasive cultural mode and not the program of a few isolated geniuses
like Rabelais or Erasmus as is still sometimes popularly believed.[64]
Non-theistic worldviews
Secular humanists

The Humanist "happy human" logo

Secular humanism is a comprehensive life stance or world view which embraces
human reason, metaphysical naturalism, altruistic morality and distributive justice,
and consciously
rejects supernatural claims, theistic faith and religiosity, pseudoscience,
and superstition.[65][66] It is sometimes referred to as Humanism (with a capital H and
no qualifying adjective).
The International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) is the world union of 117
Humanist, rationalist, irreligious, atheistic, Bright, secular, Ethical Culture,
and freethought organisations in 38 countries.[67] The "Happy Human" is the official
symbol of the IHEU as well as being regarded as a universally recognised symbol for
secular humanism.
According to the IHEU's bylaw 5.1:[68]
Humanism is a democratic and ethical life stance, which affirms that human beings
have the right and responsibility to give meaning and shape to their own lives. It
stands for the building of a more humane society through an ethic based on human
and other natural values in the spirit of reason and free inquiry through human
capabilities. It is not theistic, and it does not accept supernatural views of reality.
Religious humanists
"Religious humanists" are non-superstitious people who nevertheless see ethical
humanism as their religion, and who seek to integrate (secular) humanist ethical
philosophy with congregational rituals centred on human needs, interests, and
abilities. Though practitioners of religious humanism did not officially organise under
the name of "humanism" until the late 19th and early 20th centuries, non-theistic
religions paired with human-centred ethical philosophy have a long history. A
unified Ethical Culture movement was first founded in 1876; its founder, Felix
Adler was a former member of the Free Religious Association, and conceived of
Ethical Culture as a new religion that would retain the ethical message at the heart of
all religions. Ethical Culture was religious in the sense of playing a defining role in
people's lives and addressing issues of ultimate concern. Nowadays religious
humanists in the United States are represented by organisations such as
the American Ethical Union, and will simply describe themselves as "ethical
humanists" or "humanists". Secular humanists and religious humanists organise

together as part of larger national and international groupings, and differentiate
themselves primarily in their attitude to the promotion of humanist thinking.
Earlier attempts at inventing a secular religious tradition informed the Ethical Culture
movement. The Cult of Reason (French: Culte de la Raison) was a religion based
on deismdevised during the French Revolution by Jacques Hébert, Pierre Gaspard
Chaumette and their supporters.[69] In 1793 during the French Revolution, the
cathedral Notre Dame de Paris was turned into a "Temple of Reason" and for a
time Lady Liberty replaced the Virgin Mary on several altars.[70] In the
1850s, Auguste Comte, the Father of Sociology, founded Positivism, a "religion of
humanity".[71] One of the earliest forerunners of contemporary chartered humanist
organisations was the Humanistic Religious Association formed in 1853 in London.
This early group was democratically organised, with male and female members
participating in the election of the leadership and promoted knowledge of the
sciences, philosophy, and the arts.

Criticisms
Polemics about humanism have sometimes assumed paradoxical twists and turns.
Early 20th century critics such as Ezra Pound, T. E. Hulme, and T. S.
Eliot considered humanism to be sentimental "slop" (Hulme)[] or "an old bitch gone in
the teeth" (Pound)[72] and wanted to go back to a more manly, authoritarian society
such as existed in the Middle Ages. Postmodern critics who are self-described antihumanists, such as Jean-François Lyotard and Michel Foucault, have asserted that
humanism posits an overarching and excessively abstract notion of humanity or
universal human nature, which can then be used as a pretext for imperialism and
domination of those deemed somehow less than human. "Humanism fabricates the
human as much as it fabricates the nonhuman animal", suggests Timothy Laurie,
turning the human into what he calls "a placeholder for a range of attributes that
have been considered most virtuous among humans (e.g. rationality, altruism),
rather than most commonplace (e.g. hunger, anger)".[73] Nevertheless,

philosopher Kate Soper[74] notes that by faulting humanism for falling short of its own
benevolent ideals, anti-humanism thus frequently "secretes a humanist rhetoric".[75]
In his book, Humanism (1997), Tony Davies calls these critics "humanist antihumanists". Critics of antihumanism, most notably Jürgen Habermas, counter that
while antihumanists may highlight humanism's failure to fulfil its emancipatory ideal,
they do not offer an alternative emancipatory project of their own. [76] Others, like the
German philosopher Heidegger considered themselves humanists on the model of
the ancient Greeks, but thought humanism applied only to the German "race" and
specifically to the Nazis and thus, in Davies' words, were anti-humanist
humanists.[77] Such a reading of Heidegger's thought is itself deeply controversial;
Heidegger includes his own views and critique of Humanism in Letter On Humanism.
Davies acknowledges that after the horrific experiences of the wars of the 20th
century "it should no longer be possible to formulate phrases like 'the destiny of man'
or the 'triumph of human reason' without an instant consciousness of the folly and
brutality they drag behind them". For "it is almost impossible to think of a crime that
has not been committed in the name of human reason". Yet, he continues, "it would
be unwise to simply abandon the ground occupied by the historical humanisms. For
one thing humanism remains on many occasions the only available alternative to
bigotry and persecution. The freedom to speak and write, to organise and campaign
in defence of individual or collective interests, to protest and disobey: all these can
only be articulated in humanist terms."[78]
Modern humanists, such as Corliss Lamont or Carl Sagan, hold that humanity must
seek for truth through reason and the best observable evidence and
endorse scientific skepticism and the scientific method. However, they stipulate that
decisions about right and wrong must be based on the individual and common good,
with no consideration given to metaphysical or supernatural beings. The idea is to
engage with what is human.[79] The ultimate goal is human flourishing; making life
better for all humans, and as the most conscious species, also promoting concern for
the welfare of other sentient beings and the planet as a whole.[80] The focus is on
doing good and living well in the here and now, and leaving the world a better place
for those who come after. In 1925, the English mathematician and philosopher Alfred
North Whitehead cautioned: "The prophecy of Francis Bacon has now been fulfilled;
and man, who at times dreamt of himself as a little lower than the angels, has

submitted to become the servant and the minister of nature. It still remains to be
seen whether the same actor can play both parts".[81]
References
•

Bauman, Richard. Human Rights in Ancient Rome. Routledge Classical
Monographs, 1999 ISBN 0-415-17320-5

•

Berry, Philippa and Andrew Wernick. The Shadow of Spirit: Post-Modernism and
Religion. Routledge, (1992) 2006. ISBN 0-415-06638-7

•

Burckhardt, Jacob, Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy' 1860.

•

Christopher S. Celenza and Kenneth Gouvens, ors. Humanism and Creativity in
the Renaissance. Leiden 2006, pp. 295–326 ISBN 90-04-14907-4

•

Davies, Tony. Humanism The New Critical Idiom. Drakakis, John, series
or. University of Stirling, UK. Routledge, 1997 ISBN 0-415-11052-1

•

Ferguson, Wallace K. The Renaissance in Historical Thought. Five Centuries of
Interpretation. New York: Nachdruck: AMS, 1981 (Boston: Mifflin, 1948)

•

Flew, Antony (2008). "Humanism". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of
Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 228–
29. ISBN 978-1-4129-65804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n140.

•

Gay, Peter. Enlightenment: The Science of Freedom. New York: W. W. Norton &
Co, 1996 ISBN 0-393-31366-2

•

Gay, Peter. The Party of Humanity: Essays in the French enlightenment. New
York: W. W. Norton (1971). OCLC 11672592

•

Giustiniani,Vito. "Homo, Humanus, and the Meanings of Humanism", Journal of
the History of Ideas 46 (vol. 2, April – June 1985): 167 – 95. [1] [2] [3]

•

Grafton, Anthony. Bring Out Your Dead: The Past as Revelation. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2004 ISBN 978-0-674-00468-9

•

Grafton, Anthony. Defenders of the Text: The Traditions of Scholarship in an Age
of Science, 1450–1800. Harvard University Press, 1991

•

Grendler, Paul F. '"Georg Voigt: Historian of Humanism", in: Humanism and
Creativity in the Renaissance: Essays in Honor of Ronald G. Witt.

•

Guinness, Os. The Dust of Death Intervarsity Press 1973 ISBN 0-87784-911-0

•

Hale, John. A Concise Encyclopaedia of the Italian Renaissance. Oxford
University Press, 1981 ISBN 0-500-23333-0.

•

Johnson, Paul. The Renaissance. Modern Library Chronicles. New York: Modern
Library, 2002 ISBN 978-0-8129-6619-0

•

Kristeller, Paul Oskar. Renaissance Thought and its Sources. Columbia
University Press, 1979 ISBN 0-231-04513-1

•

Kristeller, Paul Oskar. The Renaissance Philosophy of Man. The University of
Chicago Press, 1950.

•

Laurie, Timothy. Becoming-Animal Is A Trap For Humans: Deleuze and Guattari
in Madagascar In Deleuze and the Non-Human, ed by Hannah Stark and
Jonathan Roffe, pp. 142–62. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 2015

•

Partner, Peter. Renaissance Rome, Portrait of a Society 1500–1559 University of
California Press, 1979

•

Proctor, Robert. Defining the Humanities. Indiana University Press, 1998 ISBN 0253-21219-7

•

Schmitt, Charles B. and Quentin Skinner, ors. The Cambridge History of
Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge, 1990.

Humanistic psychology is a psychological perspective that rose to prominence in
the mid-20th century in answer to the limitations of Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic
theory and B. F. Skinner's behaviorism.[1] With its roots running
from Socrates through the Renaissance, this approach emphasizes individuals'
inherent drive towards self-actualization, the process of realizing and expressing
one's own capabilities and creativity.
It helps the client gain the belief that all people are inherently good. [2] It adopts
a holistic approach to human existence and pays special attention to such
phenomena as creativity, free will, and positive human potential. It encourages
viewing ourselves as a "whole person" greater than the sum of our parts and
encourages self exploration rather than the study of behavior in other people.
Humanistic psychology acknowledges spiritual aspiration as an integral part of the
human psyche. It is linked to the emerging field of transpersonal psychology.[3][4]

Primarily, this type of therapy encourages a self-awareness and mindfulness that
helps the client change their state of mind and behaviour from one set of reactions to
a healthier one with more productive self-awareness and thoughtful actions.
Essentially, this approach allows the merging of mindfulness and behavioural
therapy, with positive social support.
In an article from the Association for Humanistic Psychology, the benefits of
humanistic therapy are described as having a "crucial opportunity to lead our
troubled culture back to its own healthy path. More than any other therapy,
Humanistic-Existential therapy models democracy. It imposes ideologies of others
upon the client less than other therapeutic practices. Freedom to choose is
maximized. We validate our clients' human potential.".[2]
In the 20th century, humanistic psychology was referred to as the "third force" in
psychology, distinct from earlier, even less humanistic approaches
of psychoanalysis and behaviorism. In our post industrial society, humanistic
psychology has become more significant; for example,
neither psychoanalysis nor behaviorism could have birthed emotional intelligence.
Its principal professional organizations in the US are the Association for Humanistic
Psychology and the Society for Humanistic Psychology (Division 32 of the American
Psychological Association). In Britain, there is the UK Association for Humanistic
Psychology Practitioners.
Origins
One of humanistic psychology's early sources was the work of Carl Rogers, who was
strongly influenced by Otto Rank, who broke with Freud in the mid-1920s. Rogers'
focus was to ensure that the developmental processes led to healthier, if not more
creative, personality functioning. The term 'actualizing tendency' was also coined by
Rogers, and was a concept that eventually led Abraham Maslow to study selfactualization as one of the needs of humans.[5][6] Rogers and Maslow introduced this
positive, humanistic psychology in response to what they viewed as the overly
pessimistic view of psychoanalysis.[7][8]
The other sources of inspiration include the philosophies
of existentialism and phenomenology.

Conceptual origins
The humanistic approach has its roots
in phenomenological and existentialist thought[9] (see Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heide
gger, Merleau-Ponty and Sartre). Eastern philosophyand psychology also play a
central role in humanistic psychology, as well as Judeo-Christian philosophies
of personalism, as each shares similar concerns about the nature of human
existence and consciousness.[4]

Carl Rogers (1902–1987), one of the founders of humanistic psychology.
For further information on influential figures in personalism, see: Emmanuel
Mounier, Gabriel Marcel, Denis de Rougemont, Jacques Maritain, Martin
Buber, Emmanuel Levinas, Max Scheler and Karol Wojtyla
As behaviorism grew out of Ivan Pavlov's work with the conditioned reflex, and laid
the foundations for academic psychology in the United States associated with the
names of John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner, Abraham Maslow gave behaviorism the
name "the second force". Historically "the first force" were psychologists
like Sigmund Freud, Alfred Adler, Erik Erikson, Carl Jung, Erich Fromm, Karen
Horney, Melanie Klein, Harry Stack Sullivan, and others.[10]
In the late 1930s, psychologists, interested in the uniquely human issues, such as
the self, selfactualization, health, hope, love, creativity, nature, being, becoming, individuality,
and meaning—that is, a concrete understanding of human existence,
included Abraham Maslow, Carl Rogers, and Clark Moustakas, who were interested
in founding a professional association dedicated to a psychology focused on these
features of human capital demanded by post-industrial society.

The humanistic psychology perspective is summarized by five core principles
or postulates of humanistic psychology first articulated in an article written by James
Bugental in 1964[11] and adapted by Tom Greening,[12] psychologist and long-time or
of the Journal of Humanistic Psychology. The five basic principles of humanistic
psychology are:
1. Human beings, as human, supersede the sum of their parts. They cannot be
reduced to components.
2. Human beings have their existence in a uniquely human context, as well as in
a cosmic ecology.
3. Human beings are aware and are aware of being aware - i.e., they are
conscious. Human consciousness always includes an awareness of oneself
in the context of other people.
4. Human beings have the ability to make choices and therefore have
responsibility.
5. Human beings are intentional, aim at goals, are aware that they cause future
events, and seek meaning, value, and creativity.
While humanistic psychology is a specific division within the American Psychological
Association (Division 32), humanistic psychology is not so much a discipline within
psychology as a perspective on the human condition that informs psychological
research and practice.
Practical origins[]
WWII created practical pressures on military psychologists, they had more patients
to see and care for than time or resources permitted. The origins of group therapy
are here.[] Eric Berne's progression of books shows this transition out of what we
might call pragmatic psychology of WW II into his later innovation, Transactional
Analysis,[] one of the most influential forms of humanistic Popular Psychology of the
later 1960s-1970s.
Orientation to scientific research[]
Humanistic psychologists generally do not believe that we will understand
human consciousness and behavior through Cartesian-Newtonian scientific
research.[13] The objection that humanistic psychologists have to traditional research

methods is that they are derived from and suited for the physical sciences [14] and not
especially appropriate to studying the complexities and nuances of human meaningmaking.[15][16][17]
However, humanistic psychology has involved scientific research of human behavior
since its inception. For example:
•

Abraham Maslow proposed many of his theories of human growth in the form of
testable hypotheses,[18][19][20] and he encouraged human scientists to put them to
the test.

•

Shortly after the founding of the American Association of Humanistic Psychology,
its president, psychologist Sidney Jourard, began his column by declaring that
"research" is a priority. "Humanistic Psychology will be best served if it
is undergirded with research that seeks to throw light on the qualities of man that
are uniquely human" (emphasis added)[21]

•

In May 1966, the AAHP release a newsletter orial that confirmed the humanistic
psychologist's "allegiance to meaningfulness in the selection of problems for
study and of research procedures, and an opposition to a primary emphasis on
objectivity at the expense of significance."[22] This underscored the importance of
research to humanistic psychologists as well as their interest in special forms of
human science investigation.

•

Likewise, in 1980, the American Psychological Association's publication for
humanistic psychology (Division 32 of APA) ran an article titled, What makes
research humanistic?[23] As Donald Polkinghorne notes, "Humanistic theory does
not propose that human action is completely independent of the environment or
the mechanical and organic orders of the body, but it does suggest that, within
the limits of experienced meanings, persons as unities can choose to act in ways
not determined by prior events...and this is the theory we seek to test through our
research" (p. 3).

A human science view is not opposed to quantitative methods, but,
following Edmund Husserl:
1. favors letting the methods be derived from the subject matter and not
uncritically adopting the methods of natural science,[24] and

2. advocates for methodological pluralism. Consequently, much of the subject
matter of psychology lends itself to qualitative approaches (e.g., the lived
experience of grief), and quantitative methods are mainly appropriate when
something can be counted without leveling the phenomena (e.g., the length
of time spent crying).
Research has remained part of the humanistic psychology agenda, though with more
of a holistic than reductionistic focus. Specific humanistic research methods evolved
in the decades following the formation of the humanistic psychology
movement.[25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34]
Development of the field[]
These preliminary meetings eventually led to other developments, which culminated
in the description of humanistic psychology as a recognizable "third force" in
psychology (first force: psychoanalysis, second force: behaviorism). Significant
developments included the formation of the Association for Humanistic Psychology
(AHP) in 1961 and the launch of the Journal of Humanistic Psychology (originally
"The Phoenix") in 1961.
Subsequently, graduate programs in Humanistic Psychology at institutions of higher
learning grew in number and enrollment. In 1971, humanistic psychology as a field
was recognized by the American Psychological Association (APA) and granted its
own division (Division 32) within the APA. Division 32 publishes its own academic
journal called The Humanistic Psychologist.[4]
The major theorists considered to have prepared the ground for Humanistic
Psychology are Otto Rank, Abraham Maslow, Carl Rogers and Rollo May. Maslow
was heavily influenced by Kurt Goldstein during their years together at Brandeis
University. Psychoanalytic writers also influenced humanistic psychology. Maslow
himself famously acknowledged his "indebtedness to Freud" in Towards a
Psychology of Being[35] Other psychoanalytic influences include the work of Wilhelm
Reich, who discussed an essentially 'good', healthy core self and Character
Analysis (1933), and Carl Gustav Jung's mythological and archetypal emphasis.
Other noteworthy inspirations for, and leaders of the movement include Roberto
Assagioli, Gordon Allport, Medard Boss, Martin Buber (close to Jacob L.
Moreno), James Bugental, Viktor Frankl, Erich Fromm, Hans-Werner

Gessmann, Amedeo Giorgi, Kurt Goldstein, Sidney Jourard, R. D. Laing, Clark
Moustakas, Lewis Mumford, Fritz Perls, Anthony Sutich, Thomas Szasz, Kirk J.
Schneider, and Ken Wilber.[4][36] Carl Rogers was trained in psychoanalysis before
developing humanistic psychology.[5]
Counseling and therapy[]

Diagram illustrating the "hierarchy of needs" theory of Abraham Maslow (1908–
1970). Click to enlarge.
The aim of humanistic therapy is usually to help the client develop a stronger and
healthier sense of self, also called self-actualization.[4][37]Humanistic therapy attempts
to teach clients that they have potential for self-fulfillment. This type of therapy is
insight-based, meaning that the therapist attempts to provide the client with insights
about their inner conflicts.[38]
Approaches[]
Humanistic psychology includes several approaches to counseling and therapy.
Among the earliest approaches we find the developmental theory of Abraham
Maslow, emphazising a hierarchy of needs and motivations; the existential
psychology of Rollo May acknowledging human choice and the tragic aspects of
human existence; and the person-centered or client-centered therapy of Carl
Rogers, which is centered on the client's capacity for self-direction and
understanding of his or her own development.[37] Client-centered therapy is nondirective; the therapist listens to the client without judgement, allowing the client to
come to insights by themselves.[38] The therapist should ensure that all of the client’s
feelings are being considered and that the therapist has a firm grasp on the concerns
of the client while ensuring that there is an air of acceptance and warmth. [5] Clientcentered therapist engages in active listening during therapy sessions.[38]

A therapist cannot be completely non-directive, however a nonjudgmental, accepting
environment that provides unconditional positive regard will incite feelings of
acceptance and value within the patients.[38]
Existential psychotherapies, an application of humanistic psychology,
applies existential philosophy, which emphasizes the idea that humans have the
freedom to make sense of their lives. They are free to define themselves and do
whatever it is they want to do. This is a type of humanistic therapy that forces the
client to explore the meaning of their life, as well as its purpose. There is a conflict
between having freedoms and having limitations. Examples of limitations include
genetics, culture, and many other factors. Existential therapy involves trying to
resolve this conflict.[5]
Another approach to humanistic counseling and therapy is Gestalt therapy, which
puts a focus on the here and now, especially as an opportunity to look past any
preconceived notions and focus on how the present is affected by the past. Role
playing also plays a large role in Gestalt therapy and allows for a true expression of
feelings that may not have been shared in other circumstances. In Gestalt therapy,
non-verbal cues are an important indicator of how the client may actually be feeling,
despite the feelings expressed.
Also part of the range of humanistic psychotherapy are concepts from depth
therapy, holistic health, encounter groups, sensitivity training, marital and family
therapies, body work, the existential psychotherapy of Medard Boss,[4] and Positive
Psychology.[39]
Most recently Compassionate Communication, the rebranding of Nonviolent
Communication of Marshall Rosenberg seems to be the leading edge of innovation
in this field because it is one of very few psychologies with both a simple and clear
model of the human psyche and a simple and clear methodology, suitable for any
two persons to address and resolve interpersonal conflict without expert intervention,
a first in the field.[]
Empathy and self-help[]
Empathy is one of the most important aspects of humanistic therapy. This idea
focuses on the therapist’s ability to see the world through the eyes of the client.
Without this, therapists can be forced to apply an external frame of reference where

the therapist is no longer understanding the actions and thoughts of the client as the
client would, but strictly as a therapist which defeats the purpose of humanistic
therapy. Included in empathizing, unconditional positive regard is one of the key
elements of humanistic psychology. Unconditional positive regard refers to the care
that the therapist needs to have for the client. This ensures that the therapist does
not become the authority figure in the relationship allowing for a more open flow of
information as well as a kinder relationship between the two. A therapist practicing
humanistic therapy needs to show a willingness to listen and ensure the comfort of
the patient where genuine feelings may be shared but are not forced upon
someone.[5] Marshall Rosenberg, one of Carl Rogers' students, emphasizes empathy
in the relationship in his concept of Nonviolent Communication.
Self-help is also part of humanistic psychology: Sheila Ernst and Lucy
Goodison have described using some of the main humanistic approaches in selfhelp groups.[40] Humanistic Psychology is applicable to self-help because it is
oriented towards changing the way a person thinks. One can only improve once they
decide to change their ways of thinking about themselves, once they decide to help
themselves. Co-counselling, which is an approach based purely on self-help, is
regarded as coming from humanistic psychology as well.[41] Humanistic theory has
had a strong influence on other forms of popular therapy, including Harvey
Jackins' Re-evaluation Counselling and the work of Carl Rogers, including his
student Eugene Gendlin; (see Focusing) as well as on the development of the
Humanistic Psychodrama by Hans-Werner Gessmann since the 80s.[42]
The ideal self[]
The ideal self and real self involve understanding the issues that arise from having
an idea of what you wish you were as a person, and having that not match with who
you actually are as a person (incongruence). The ideal self is what a person believes
should be done, as well as what their core values are. The real self is what is
actually played out in life. Through humanistic therapy, an understanding of the
present allows clients to add positive experiences to their real self-concept. The goal
is to have the two concepts of self become congruent. Rogers believed that only
when a therapist was able to be congruent, a real relationship occurs in therapy. It is
much easier to trust someone who is willing to share feelings openly, even if it may

not be what the client always wants; this allows the therapist to foster a strong
relationship.[5]
Non-pathological[]
Humanistic psychology tends to look beyond the medical model of psychology in
order to open up a nonpathologizing view of the person.[37] This usually implies that
the therapist downplays the pathological aspects of a person's life in favour of the
healthy aspects. Humanistic psychology tries to be a science of human experience,
focusing on the actual lived experience of persons.[4] Therefore, a key ingredient is
the actual meeting of therapist and client and the possibilities for dialogue to ensue
between them. The role of the therapist is to create an environment where the client
can freely express any thoughts or feelings; he does not suggest topics for
conversation nor does he guide the conversation in any way. The therapist also does
not analyze or interpret the client’s behavior or any information the client shares. The
role of the therapist is to provide empathy and to listen attentively to the client.[5]

Social change[]
While personal transformation may be the primary focus of most humanistic
psychologists, many now investigate pressing social, cultural, and gender
issues.[43] Even the earliest writers who were associated with and inspired by
psychological humanism[4] explored topics as diverse as the political nature of
"normal" and everyday experience (R. D. Laing), the disintegration of the capacity to
love in modern consumerist society (Erich Fromm),[44] the growing technological
dominance over human life (Medard Boss), and the question of evil (Rollo
May and Carl Rogers).
In 1978, the Association for Humanistic Psychology (AHP) embarked on a three-year
effort to explore how the principles of humanistic psychology could be used to further
the process of positive social and political change.[45] The effort included a "12-Hour
Political Party", held in San Francisco in 1980, where nearly 1,400
attendees[46] discussed presentations by such non-traditional social thinkers
as Ecotopia author Ernest Callenbach, Aquarian Conspiracy author Marilyn

Ferguson, Person/Planet author Theodore Roszak, and New Age
Politics author Mark Satin.[47] The emergent perspective was summarized in a
manifesto by AHP President George Leonard. It proffered such ideas as moving to a
slow-growth or no-growth economy, decentralizing and "deprofessionalizing" society,
and teaching social and emotional competencies in order to provide a foundation for
more humane public policies and a healthier culture.[48]
There have been many other attempts to articulate humanistic-psychology-oriented
approaches to social change. For example, in 1979 California state legislator John
Vasconcellos published a book calling for the integration of liberal politics and
humanistic-psychological insight.[49] From 1979–1983 the New World Alliance, a U.S.
political organization based in Washington, D.C., attempted to inject humanisticpsychology ideas into political thinking and processes;[50] sponsors of its newsletter
included Vasconcellos and Carl Rogers.[51]
In 1989 Maureen O'Hara, who had worked with both Carl Rogers and Paolo Freire,
pointed to a convergence between the two thinkers. According to O'Hara, both focus
on developing critical consciousness of situations which oppress and
dehumanize.[52] Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Institute of Noetic
Sciences president Willis Harman argued that significant social change cannot occur
without significant consciousness change.[53] In the 21st century, humanistic
psychologists such as Edmund Bourne[54] and Joanna Macy[55] continue to apply
psychological insights to social and political issues.
In addition to its uses in thinking about social change, humanistic psychology is
considered to be the main theoretical and methodological source of humanistic
social work.[56][57]
Creativity in corporations[]
Humanistic psychology's emphasis on creativity and wholeness created a foundation
for new approaches towards human capital in the workplace stressing creativity and
the relevance of emotional interactions. Previously the connotations of "creativity"
were reserved for and primarily restricted to, working artists. In the 1980s, with
increasing numbers of people working in the cognitive-cultural
economy, creativity came to be seen as a useful commodity and competitive edge

for international brands. This led to corporate creativity training in-service trainings
for employees, led pre-eminently by Ned Herrmann at G.E. in the late 1970s.
Humanistic psychology concepts were embraced in education and social work,
peaking in the 1970s-1980s, particularly in North America. However, as with whole
language theory, training practice were too superficial in most institutional settings.
Though humanistic psychology raised the bar of insight and understanding of the
whole person, professionally it is primarily practiced today by individual licensed
counselors and therapists. Outside of that humanistic psychology provides the
foundation for virtually every method of Energy Medicine; yet, too little coherence
exists yet in this field to discuss it easily.
Humanistic social work[]
After psychotherapy, social work is the most important beneficiary of the humanistic
psychology's theory and methodology.[58] These have produced a deep reform of the
modern social work theory and practice,[59] leading, among others, to the occurrence
of a particular theory and methodology: Humanistic Social Work. Most values and
principles of the humanistic social work practice, described by Malcolm Payne in his
book Humanistic Social Work: Core Principles in Practice, namely creativity in
human life and practice, developing self and spirituality, developing security and
resilience, accountability, flexibility and complexity in human life and
practice,[56] directly originate from the humanistic psychological theory and
humanistic psychotherapy practice.
Also, the representation and approach of the client (as human being) and social
issue (as human issue) in social work is made from the humanistic psychology
position. According to Petru Stefaroi, the way humanistic representation and
approach of the client and his personality is realized is, in fact, the theoreticalaxiological and methodological foundation of humanistic social work.[60]
In setting goals and the intervention activities, in order to solve social/human
problems, there prevail critical terms and categories of the humanistic psychology
and psychotherapy, such as: self-actualization, human
potential, holistic approach, human being, free will, subjectivity, human
experience, self-determination/development, spirituality, creativity, positive

thinking, client-centered and context-centered
approach/intervention, empathy, personal growth, empowerment.[61]
References
1. Jump up^ Benjafield, John G. (2010). A History of Psychology: Third ion.
Don Mills, ON: Oxford University Press. pp. 357–362. ISBN 978-0-19543021-9.
2. ^ Jump up to:a b "Humanistic Therapy." CRC Health Group. Web. 29 Mar.
2015. http://www.crchealth.com/types-of-therapy/what-is-humanistic-therapy
3. Jump up^ "humanistic psychology n." A Dictionary of Psychology. ed by
Andrew M. Colman. Oxford University Press 2009. Oxford Reference Online.
Oxford University Press. 25 May 2010 [1]
4. ^ Jump up to:a b c d e f g h Aanstoos, C. Serlin, I., & Greening, T. (2000). A
History of Division 32 (Humanistic Psychology) of the American Psychological
Association. In D. Dewsbury (Ed.), Unification through division: Histories of
the divisions of the American Psychological Association, Vol. V. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
5. ^ Jump up to:a b c d e f g Kramer. Introduction to Clinical Psychology 7th Ed.
Pearson. ISBN 978-0-13-172967-4.
6. Jump up^ Kramer, Geoffrey P.; Douglas A. Bernstein; Vicky Phares
(2009). Introduction to Clinical Psychology (7 ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 254.
7. Jump up^ Schacter. Psychology 2nd Ed. Worth Publishers. ISBN 978-14292-3719-2.
8. Jump up^ Schacter, Daniel L.; Daniel T. Gilbert; Daniel M. Wegner
(2011). Psychology (2 ed.). New York, NY: Worth Publishers. p. 15.
9. Jump up^ Humanistic Psychology, APA
10. Jump up^ AHP History, About Humanistic Psychology
11. Jump up^ Bugental, J. (1964). The third force in psychology. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 4(1), 19-26. doi:10.1177/002216786400400102
12. Jump up^ Greening, T. (2006). Five basic postulates of humanistic
psychology. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 46(3), 239-239.
doi:10.1177/002216780604600301

13. Jump up^ Carlson, Neil R. (2010). Psychology the Science of Behaviour.
Canada: Pearson Canada Inc. p. 22. ISBN 0-205-64524-0.
14. Jump up^ Harman, W. W. (1965). The humanities in an age of science. In F.
T. Severin (Ed.), Humanistic viewpoints in psychology: A book of readings
(pp. 282-91). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. (Original work published 1962)
15. Jump up^ Rogers, C. R. (1965). The place of the person in the new world of
the behavioral sciences. In F. T. Severin (Ed.), Humanistic viewpoints in
psychology: A book of readings (pp. 387-407). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
16. Jump up^ Welch, I. D., & Rodwick, J. R. (1978). Communicating the
sciences: A humanistic viewpoint. In I. D. Welch, G. A. Tate, & F. Richards
(Eds.), Humanistic psychology: A source book (pp. 335-42). Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus Books.
17. Jump up^ Polkinghorne, D. E. (1993). Research methodology in humanistic
psychology. The Humanistic Psychologist, 20(2-3), 218-242.
18. Jump up^ Maslow, A. H. (1967). A theory of metamotivation: The biological
rooting of the value-life. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 7(2), 93-127.
doi:10.1177/002216786700700201
19. Jump up^ Maslow, A. H. (1962). Notes on being-psychology. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 2(2), 47-71. doi:10.1177/002216786200200205
20. Jump up^ Maslow, A. H. (2000). Theory Z. In D. C. Stephens (Ed.), The
Maslow business reader (pp. 277-80). New York, NY: Wiley.
21. Jump up^ Jourard, S. M. (1963, December). Objectives outlined. Phoenix:
Newsletter of the American Association for Humanistic Psychology, 1(1), 2.
22. Jump up^ AAHP Newsletter; May 1966; 3(1) p. 2 [Association for Humanistic
Psychology (AHP)]
23. Jump up^ Polkinghorne, D. (1980). What makes research humanistic?
Newsletter of the American Psychological Association - Division 32. Fal-Win.
pp. 4-8.
24. Jump up^ Giorgi, Amedeo (2009). The descriptive phenomenological
method in psychology: A modified Husserlian approach. Pittsburgh, PA:
Duquesne University Press. ISBN 978-0-8207-0418-0

25. Jump up^ Bugental, J. F. T. (1967). Research areas and methods. In J. F. T.
Bugental (Ed.), Challenges of humanistic psychology (pp. 79-81). New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill.
26. Jump up^ Polkinghorne, D. E. (1992). Research methodology in humanistic
psychology. The Humanistic Psychologist, 20(2), 218-242.
doi:10.1080/08873267.1992.9986792
27. Jump up^ Sargent, S. S. (1967). Humanistic methodology in personality and
social psychology. In J. F. T. Bugental (Ed.), Challenges of humanistic
psychology (pp. 127-33). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
28. Jump up^ Krippner, S. (2001). Research methodology in humanistic
psychology in the light of postmodernity. In K. Schneider, J. F. T. Bugental, &
J. F. Pierson (Eds.), The handbook of humanistic psychology: Leading edges
in theory, research, and practice (pp. 289-304). London: SAGE.
29. Jump up^ Giorgi, A. (2005). The phenomenological movement and research
in the human sciences. Nursing Science Quarterly, 18(1), 75-82.
doi:10.1177/0894318404272112
30. Jump up^ Taylor, E. (2009). The zen doctrine of “no-method”. The
Humanistic Psychologist, 37(4), 295-306. doi:10.1080/08873260903113576
31. Jump up^ Pfaffenberger, A. (2005). Optimal adult development: An inquiry
into the dynamics of growth. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 45(3), 279.
doi:10.1177/0022167804274359
32. Jump up^ Franco, Z., Friedman, H., & Arons, M. (2008). Are qualitative
methods always best for humanistic psychology research? A conversation on
the epistemological divide between humanistic and positive psychology. The
Humanistic Psychologist, 36(2), 159-203. doi:10.1080/08873260802111242
33. Jump up^ Friedman, H. (2008). Humanistic and positive psychology: The
methodological and epistemological divide. The Humanistic Psychologist,
36(2), 113-126. doi:10.1080/08873260802111036
34. Jump up^ Barrell, . J., Aanstoos, C., Rechards, . C., & Arons, M. (1987).
Human science research methods. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 27(4),
424-457. doi:10.1177/0022167887274004
35. Jump up^ Maslow, A. (1998).Towards a psychology of being, 3rd ed. New
York: Wiley.

36. Jump up^ Moss, D. (2001). The roots and genealogy of humanistic
psychology. In K.J. Schneider, J.F.T. Bugental & J.F. Pierson (Eds.) The
handbook of humanistic psychology: Leading edges in theory, research and
practice (pp. 5-20). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
37. ^ Jump up to:a b c Clay, Rebecca A. (September 2002). "A renaissance for
humanistic psychology. The field explores new niches while building on its
past." American Psychological Association Monitor, 33 (8).
38. ^ Jump up to:a b c d Myers, D. G. (2014). Psychology: Tenth ion in modules.
New York, NY: Worth Publishers
39. Jump up^ Duckworth, A. L., Steen, T. A., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005).
Positive psychology in clinical practice. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology
1, 629-651.
40. Jump up^ Ernst, Sheila & Goodison, Lucy (1981). In our own hands: A book
of self help therapy. London: The Women's Press. ISBN 0-7043-3841-6
41. Jump up^ John Rowan's Guide to Humanistic Psychology
42. Jump up^ [2]
43. Jump up^ Hoffman, Louis, et al. (2009). Existential psychology East-West.
Colorado Springs: University of the Rockies Press. ISBN 978-0-8207-0418-0
44. Jump up^ Fromm, E. (1956).The art of loving. New York: Harper & Row.
45. Jump up^ Ferguson, Marilyn (September 4, 1978). "AHP Goes Public,
Launches Era of Social Involvement". Brain/Mind Bulletin. Reprinted in AHP
Newsletter, October 1978, pp. 9-11 (pdf pp. 6-8). Retrieved April 12, 2013.
46. Jump up^ Drach, Jack (May 1980). "High Expectations, Mixed Results: A
Critique of AHP's 12-Hour Political Party". AHP Newsletter, p. 41. Retrieved
April 12, 2013.
47. Jump up^ Unidentified author (May 1980). "Presenters". AHP Newsletter, p.
4. Retrieved April 12, 2013.
48. Jump up^ Leonard, George (May 1980). "Sketch for a Humanistic
Manifesto". AHP Newskletter, pp. 5-7. Retrieved April 12, 2013
49. Jump up^ Vasconcellos, John (1979). A Liberating Vision: Politics for
Growing Humans. Impact Publishers. ISBN978-0-915166-17-6.

50. Jump up^ Olson, Bob; Saunders, Marilyn (December 1980). "The New
World Alliance: Toward a Transformational Politics." AHP Newsletter, pp. 14–
16. Retrieved May 9, 2016.
51. Jump up^ Stein, Arthur (1985). Seeds of the Seventies: Values, Work, and
Commitment in Post-Vietnam America. University Press of New England,
p. 136. ISBN 978-0-87451-343-1.
52. Jump up^ O'Hara, M. (1989). Person-centered approach as conscientização:
The works of Carl Rogers and Paulo Freire. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 29(1), 11-35. doi:10.1177/0022167889291002.
53. Jump up^ Harman, Willis (1988). Global Mind Change: The New Age
Revolution in the Way We Think. Warner Books ion. ISBN 978-0-446-391474. Substantially revised in 1998 as Global Mind Change: The Promise of the
21st Century. Introduction by Hazel Henderson. Berrett-Koehler
Publishers. ISBN 978-1-57675-029-2.
54. Jump up^ Bourne, Edmund J. (2008). Global Shift: How a New Worldview Is
Transforming Humanity. New Harbinger Publications. ISBN 978-1-57224597-6.
55. Jump up^ Macy, Joanna; Johnstone, Chris (2012). Active Hope: How to
Face the Mess We're In Without Going Crazy. New World Library. ISBN 9781-57731-972-6.
56. ^ Jump up to:a b Payne, M. (2011). Humanistic Social Work: Core Principles
in Practice. Chicago: Lyceum, Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan.
57. Jump up^ Stefaroi, P. (2012). Humanistic Paradigm of Social Work or Brief
Introduction in Humanistic Social Work. Social Work Review, 1, pp. 161-174.
58. Jump up^ Ellenhorn, R. (1988). Toward a Humanistic Social Work: Social
Work for Conviviality, Humanity & Society, Vol. 12, Issue 2, p.166.
59. Jump up^ Payne, M. (2005). Modern Social Work Theory (3rd ed.), Chicago:
Lyceum Books.
60. Jump up^ Stefaroi, P. (2009). Humanistic Perspective on Customer in Social
Work, Social Work Review, 1-2, pp. 9-34.
61. Jump up^ Humanistische Akademie. (1998). Humanistische Sozialarbeit,
Berlin: Humanistische Akademie. Series: Humanismus aktuell, H. 3. Jg. 2.

View publication stats

