This article is about the general term. For other uses, see Science (disambiguation).

The Universe represented as multiple diskshaped slices across time, which passes from
left to right.

Science (from the Latin word scientia, meaning "knowledge")[1] is a systematic enterprise that builds
and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the
universe.[2][a]
The earliest roots of science can be traced to Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia in around 3500 to
3000 BCE.[3][4] Their contributions to mathematics, astronomy, and medicine entered and shaped
Greek natural philosophy of classical antiquity, whereby formal attempts were made to explain
events of the physical world based on natural causes.[3][4] After the fall of the Western Roman
Empire, knowledge of Greek conceptions of the world deteriorated in Western Europe during the
early centuries (400 to 1000 CE) of the Middle Ages[5] but was preserved in the Muslim world during
the Islamic Golden Age.[6] The recovery and assimilation of Greek works and Islamic inquiries into
Western Europe from the 10th to 13th century revived natural philosophy,[5][7] which was later
transformed by the Scientiﬁc Revolution that began in the 16th century[8] as new ideas and
discoveries departed from previous Greek conceptions and traditions.[9][10][11][12] The scientiﬁc
method soon played a greater role in knowledge creation and it was not until the 19th century that
many of the institutional and professional features of science began to take shape.[13][14][15]
Modern science is typically divided into three major branches that consist of the natural sciences
(e.g., biology, chemistry, and physics), which study nature in the broadest sense; the social sciences
(e.g., economics, psychology, and sociology), which study individuals and societies; and the formal
sciences (e.g., logic, mathematics, and theoretical computer science), which study abstract
concepts. There is disagreement,[16][17] however, on whether the formal sciences actually constitute
a science as they do not rely on empirical evidence.[18] Disciplines that use existing scientiﬁc
knowledge for practical purposes, such as engineering and medicine, are described as applied
sciences.[19][20][21][22]

Science is based on research, which is commonly conducted in academic and research institutions
as well as in government agencies and companies. The practical impact of scientiﬁc research has
led to the emergence of science policies that seek to inﬂuence the scientiﬁc enterprise by
prioritizing the development of commercial products, armaments, health care, and environmental
protection.

History
Main article: History of science

Science in a broad sense existed before the modern era and in many historical civilizations.[23]
Modern science is distinct in its approach and successful in its results, so it now deﬁnes what
science is in the strictest sense of the term.[24][b] Science in its original sense was a word for a type
of knowledge, rather than a specialized word for the pursuit of such knowledge. In particular, it was
the type of knowledge which people can communicate to each other and share. For example,
knowledge about the working of natural things was gathered long before recorded history and led to
the development of complex abstract thought. This is shown by the construction of complex
calendars, techniques for making poisonous plants edible, public works at national scale, such as
those which harnessed the ﬂoodplain of the Yangtse with reservoirs,[25] dams, and dikes, and
buildings such as the Pyramids. However, no consistent conscious distinction was made between
knowledge of such things, which are true in every community, and other types of communal
knowledge, such as mythologies and legal systems. Metallurgy was known in prehistory, and the
Vinča culture was the earliest known producer of bronze-like alloys. It is thought that early
experimentation with heating and mixing of substances over time developed into alchemy.

Early cultures
Main article: History of science in early cultures

Clay models of
animal livers dating
between the
nineteenth and
eighteenth
centuries BCE,
found in the royal
palace in Mari,
Syria

Neither the words nor the concepts "science" and "nature" were part of the conceptual landscape in
the ancient near east.[26] The ancient Mesopotamians used knowledge about the properties of
various natural chemicals for manufacturing pottery, faience, glass, soap, metals, lime plaster, and
waterprooﬁng;[27] they also studied animal physiology, anatomy, and behavior for divinatory
purposes[27] and made extensive records of the movements of astronomical objects for their study
of astrology.[28] The Mesopotamians had intense interest in medicine[27] and the earliest medical
prescriptions appear in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2112 BCE – c. 2004 BCE).[29]
Nonetheless, the Mesopotamians seem to have had little interest in gathering information about the
natural world for the mere sake of gathering information[27] and mainly only studied scientiﬁc
subjects which had obvious practical applications or immediate relevance to their religious
system.[27]

Classical antiquity
Main article: History of science in classical antiquity
See also: Nature (philosophy)

In classical antiquity, there is no real ancient analog of a modern scientist. Instead, well-educated,
usually upper-class, and almost universally male individuals performed various investigations into
nature whenever they could afford the time.[30] Before the invention or discovery of the concept of
"nature" (ancient Greek phusis) by the Pre-Socratic philosophers, the same words tend to be used to
describe the natural "way" in which a plant grows,[31] and the "way" in which, for example, one tribe
worships a particular god. For this reason, it is claimed these men were the ﬁrst philosophers in the
strict sense, and also the ﬁrst people to clearly distinguish "nature" and "convention."[32]:209 Natural
philosophy, the precursor of natural science, was thereby distinguished as the knowledge of nature
and things which are true for every community, and the name of the specialized pursuit of such
knowledge was philosophy – the realm of the ﬁrst philosopher-physicists. They were mainly
speculators or theorists, particularly interested in astronomy. In contrast, trying to use knowledge of
nature to imitate nature (artiﬁce or technology, Greek technē) was seen by classical scientists as a
more appropriate interest for lower class artisans.[33]
The early Greek philosophers of the Milesian school, which was founded by Thales of Miletus and
later continued by his successors Anaximander and Anaximenes, were the ﬁrst to attempt to
explain natural phenomena without relying on the supernatural.[34] The Pythagoreans developed a
complex number philosophy[35]:467–68 and contributed signiﬁcantly to the development of
mathematical science.[35]:465 The theory of atoms was developed by the Greek philosopher
Leucippus and his student Democritus.[36][37] The Greek doctor Hippocrates established the
tradition of systematic medical science[38][39] and is known as "The Father of Medicine".[40]

Aristotle, 384–322 BCE, one
of the early ﬁgures in the
development of the scientiﬁc
method.[41]

A turning point in the history of early philosophical science was Socrates' example of applying
philosophy to the study of human matters, including human nature, the nature of political
communities, and human knowledge itself. The Socratic method as documented by Plato's
dialogues is a dialectic method of hypothesis elimination: better hypotheses are found by steadily

identifying and eliminating those that lead to contradictions. This was a reaction to the Sophist
emphasis on rhetoric. The Socratic method searches for general, commonly held truths that shape
beliefs and scrutinizes them to determine their consistency with other beliefs.[42] Socrates criticized
the older type of study of physics as too purely speculative and lacking in self-criticism. Socrates
was later, in the words of his Apology, accused of corrupting the youth of Athens because he did
"not believe in the gods the state believes in, but in other new spiritual beings". Socrates refuted
these claims,[43] but was sentenced to death.[44]: 30e
Aristotle later created a systematic programme of teleological philosophy: Motion and change is
described as the actualization of potentials already in things, according to what types of things they
are. In his physics, the Sun goes around the Earth, and many things have it as part of their nature
that they are for humans. Each thing has a formal cause, a ﬁnal cause, and a role in a cosmic order
with an unmoved mover. The Socratics also insisted that philosophy should be used to consider the
practical question of the best way to live for a human being (a study Aristotle divided into ethics and
political philosophy). Aristotle maintained that man knows a thing scientiﬁcally "when he possesses
a conviction arrived at in a certain way, and when the ﬁrst principles on which that conviction rests
are known to him with certainty".[45]
The Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos (310–230 BCE) was the ﬁrst to propose a heliocentric
model of the universe, with the Sun at the center and all the planets orbiting it.[46] Aristarchus's
model was widely rejected because it was believed to violate the laws of physics.[46] The inventor
and mathematician Archimedes of Syracuse made major contributions to the beginnings of
calculus[47] and has sometimes been credited as its inventor,[47] although his proto-calculus lacked
several deﬁning features.[47] Pliny the Elder was a Roman writer and polymath, who wrote the
seminal encyclopedia Natural History,[48][49][50] dealing with history, geography, medicine, astronomy,
earth science, botany, and zoology.[48] Other scientists or proto-scientists in Antiquity were
Theophrastus, Euclid, Herophilos, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, and Galen.

Medieval science

De potentiis anime sensitive, Gregor
Reisch (1504) Margarita philosophica.
Medieval science postulated a
ventricle of the brain as the location for
our common sense,[51]:189 where the
forms from our sensory systems
commingled.
Further information: Byzantine science, Science in the medieval Islamic world, and European science in the Middle Ages

Because of the collapse of the Western Roman Empire due to the Migration Period an intellectual
decline took place in the western part of Europe in the 400s. In contrast, the Byzantine Empire
resisted the attacks from the barbarians, and preserved and improved upon the learning. John
Philoponus, a Byzantine scholar in the 500s, was the ﬁrst scholar ever to question Aristotle's
teaching of physics and to note its ﬂaws. John Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian principles of
physics served as an inspiration to medieval scholars as well as to Galileo Galilei who ten centuries
later, during the Scientiﬁc Revolution, extensively cited Philoponus in his works while making the
case as to why Aristotelian physics was ﬂawed.[52][53]
During late antiquity and the early Middle Ages, the Aristotelian approach to inquiries on natural
phenomena was used. Aristotle's four causes prescribed that four "why" questions should be
answered in order to explain things scientiﬁcally.[54] Some ancient knowledge was lost, or in some
cases kept in obscurity, during the fall of the Western Roman Empire and periodic political
struggles. However, the general ﬁelds of science (or "natural philosophy" as it was called) and much
of the general knowledge from the ancient world remained preserved through the works of the early
Latin encyclopedists like Isidore of Seville.[55] However, Aristotle's original texts were eventually lost
in Western Europe, and only one text by Plato was widely known, the Timaeus, which was the only
Platonic dialogue, and one of the few original works of classical natural philosophy, available to

Latin readers in the early Middle Ages. Another original work that gained inﬂuence in this period was
Ptolemy's Almagest, which contains a geocentric description of the solar system.
During late antiquity, in the Byzantine empire many Greek classical texts were preserved. Many
Syriac translations were done by groups such as the Nestorians and Monophysites.[56] They played
a role when they translated Greek classical texts into Arabic under the Caliphate, during which many
types of classical learning were preserved and in some cases improved upon.[56][c] In addition, the
neighboring Sassanid Empire established the medical Academy of Gondeshapur where Greek,
Syriac and Persian physicians established the most important medical center of the ancient world
during the 6th and 7th centuries.[57]
The House of Wisdom was established in Abbasid-era Baghdad, Iraq,[58] where the Islamic study of
Aristotelianism ﬂourished. Al-Kindi (801–873) was the ﬁrst of the Muslim Peripatetic philosophers,
and is known for his efforts to introduce Greek and Hellenistic philosophy to the Arab world.[59] The
Islamic Golden Age ﬂourished from this time until the Mongol invasions of the 13th century. Ibn alHaytham (Alhazen), as well as his predecessor Ibn Sahl, was familiar with Ptolemy's Optics, and
used experiments as a means to gain knowledge.[d][60][61]:463–65 Furthermore, doctors and
alchemists such as the Persians Avicenna and Al-Razi also greatly developed the science of
Medicine with the former writing the Canon of Medicine, a medical encyclopedia used until the 18th
century and the latter discovering multiple compounds like alcohol. Avicenna's canon is considered
to be one of the most important publications in medicine and they both contributed signiﬁcantly to
the practice of experimental medicine, using clinical trials and experiments to back their claims.[62]
In Classical antiquity, Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned in
ancient times, but in Middle Ages it changed: medical teachers and students at Bologna began to
open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (c. 1275–1326) produced the ﬁrst known anatomy
textbook based on human dissection.[63][64]
By the eleventh century most of Europe had become Christian; stronger monarchies emerged;
borders were restored; technological developments and agricultural innovations were made which
increased the food supply and population. In addition, classical Greek texts started to be translated
from Arabic and Greek into Latin, giving a higher level of scientiﬁc discussion in Western Europe.[65]
By 1088, the ﬁrst university in Europe (the University of Bologna) had emerged from its clerical
beginnings. Demand for Latin translations grew (for example, from the Toledo School of
Translators); western Europeans began collecting texts written not only in Latin, but also Latin
translations from Greek, Arabic, and Hebrew. Manuscript copies of Alhazen's Book of Optics also
propagated across Europe before 1240,[66]:Intro. p. xx as evidenced by its incorporation into Vitello's
Perspectiva. Avicenna's Canon was translated into Latin.[67] In particular, the texts of Aristotle,

Ptolemy,[e] and Euclid, preserved in the Houses of Wisdom and also in the Byzantine Empire,[68] were
sought amongst Catholic scholars. The inﬂux of ancient texts caused the Renaissance of the 12th
century and the ﬂourishing of a synthesis of Catholicism and Aristotelianism known as
Scholasticism in western Europe, which became a new geographic center of science. An experiment
in this period would be understood as a careful process of observing, describing, and classifying.[69]
One prominent scientist in this era was Roger Bacon. Scholasticism had a strong focus on
revelation and dialectic reasoning, and gradually fell out of favour over the next centuries, as
alchemy's focus on experiments that include direct observation and meticulous documentation
slowly increased in importance.

Renaissance and early modern science
Main article: Scientiﬁc Revolution

Astronomy became more accurate
after Tycho Brahe devised his scientiﬁc
instruments for measuring angles
between two celestial bodies, before
the invention of the telescope. Brahe's

observations were the basis for
Kepler's laws.

Alhazen disproved Ptolemy's theory of vision,[70] but did not make any corresponding changes to
Aristotle's metaphysics. The scientiﬁc revolution ran concurrently to a process where elements of
Aristotle's metaphysics such as ethics, teleology and formal causality slowly fell out of favour.
Scholars slowly came to realize that the universe itself might well be devoid of both purpose and

ethical imperatives. The development from a physics infused with goals, ethics, and spirit, toward a
physics where these elements do not play an integral role, took centuries. This development was
enhanced by the Condemnations of 1277, where Aristotle's books were banned by the Catholic
church. This allowed the theoretical possibility of vacuum and motion in a vacuum. A direct result
was the emergence of the science of dynamics.
New developments in optics played a role in the inception of the Renaissance, both by challenging
long-held metaphysical ideas on perception, as well as by contributing to the improvement and
development of technology such as the camera obscura and the telescope. Before what we now
know as the Renaissance started, Roger Bacon, Vitello, and John Peckham each built up a
scholastic ontology upon a causal chain beginning with sensation, perception, and ﬁnally
apperception of the individual and universal forms of Aristotle.[71] A model of vision later known as
perspectivism was exploited and studied by the artists of the Renaissance. This theory uses only
three of Aristotle's four causes: formal, material, and ﬁnal.[72]
In the sixteenth century, Copernicus formulated a heliocentric model of the solar system unlike the
geocentric model of Ptolemy's Almagest. This was based on a theorem that the orbital periods of
the planets are longer as their orbs are farther from the centre of motion, which he found not to
agree with Ptolemy's model.[73]
Kepler and others challenged the notion that the only function of the eye is perception, and shifted
the main focus in optics from the eye to the propagation of light.[72][74]:102 Kepler modelled the eye
as a water-ﬁlled glass sphere with an aperture in front of it to model the entrance pupil. He found
that all the light from a single point of the scene was imaged at a single point at the back of the
glass sphere. The optical chain ends on the retina at the back of the eye.[f] Kepler is best known,
however, for improving Copernicus' heliocentric model through the discovery of Kepler's laws of
planetary motion. Kepler did not reject Aristotelian metaphysics, and described his work as a search
for the Harmony of the Spheres.

Galileo Galilei, regarded as the father
of modern science.[75]: Vol. 24, No. 1, p. 36

Galileo made innovative use of experiment and mathematics. However, he became persecuted after
Pope Urban VIII blessed Galileo to write about the Copernican system. Galileo had used arguments
from the Pope and put them in the voice of the simpleton in the work "Dialogue Concerning the Two
Chief World Systems", which greatly offended Urban VIII.[76]
In Northern Europe, the new technology of the printing press was widely used to publish many
arguments, including some that disagreed widely with contemporary ideas of nature. René
Descartes and Francis Bacon published philosophical arguments in favor of a new type of nonAristotelian science. Descartes emphasized individual thought and argued that mathematics rather
than geometry should be used in order to study nature. Bacon emphasized the importance of
experiment over contemplation. Bacon further questioned the Aristotelian concepts of formal cause
and ﬁnal cause, and promoted the idea that science should study the laws of "simple" natures, such
as heat, rather than assuming that there is any speciﬁc nature, or "formal cause", of each complex
type of thing. This new science began to see itself as describing "laws of nature". This updated
approach to studies in nature was seen as mechanistic. Bacon also argued that science should aim
for the ﬁrst time at practical inventions for the improvement of all human life.

Age of Enlightenment
Main article: Age of Enlightenment

Isaac Newton, shown here in a 1689
portrait, made seminal contributions to
classical mechanics, gravity, and
optics. Newton shares credit with
Gottfried Leibniz for the development
of calculus.

As a precursor to the Age of Enlightenment, Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz succeeded
in developing a new physics, now referred to as classical mechanics, which could be conﬁrmed by
experiment and explained using mathematics. Leibniz also incorporated terms from Aristotelian
physics, but now being used in a new non-teleological way, for example, "energy" and "potential"
(modern versions of Aristotelian "energeia and potentia"). This implied a shift in the view of objects:
Where Aristotle had noted that objects have certain innate goals that can be actualized, objects
were now regarded as devoid of innate goals. In the style of Francis Bacon, Leibniz assumed that
different types of things all work according to the same general laws of nature, with no special
formal or ﬁnal causes for each type of thing. It is during this period that the word "science" gradually
became more commonly used to refer to a type of pursuit of a type of knowledge, especially
knowledge of nature – coming close in meaning to the old term "natural philosophy."
During this time, the declared purpose and value of science became producing wealth and
inventions that would improve human lives, in the materialistic sense of having more food, clothing,
and other things. In Bacon's words, "the real and legitimate goal of sciences is the endowment of
human life with new inventions and riches", and he discouraged scientists from pursuing intangible
philosophical or spiritual ideas, which he believed contributed little to human happiness beyond "the
fume of subtle, sublime, or pleasing speculation".[77]
Science during the Enlightenment was dominated by scientiﬁc societies and academies, which had
largely replaced universities as centres of scientiﬁc research and development. Societies and

academies were also the backbone of the maturation of the scientiﬁc profession. Another
important development was the popularization of science among an increasingly literate
population. Philosophes introduced the public to many scientiﬁc theories, most notably through the
Encyclopédie and the popularization of Newtonianism by Voltaire as well as by Émilie du Châtelet,
the French translator of Newton's Principia.
Some historians have marked the 18th century as a drab period in the history of science;[78]
however, the century saw signiﬁcant advancements in the practice of medicine, mathematics, and
physics; the development of biological taxonomy; a new understanding of magnetism and
electricity; and the maturation of chemistry as a discipline, which established the foundations of
modern chemistry.
Enlightenment philosophers chose a short history of scientiﬁc predecessors – Galileo, Boyle, and
Newton principally – as the guides and guarantors of their applications of the singular concept of
nature and natural law to every physical and social ﬁeld of the day. In this respect, the lessons of
history and the social structures built upon it could be discarded.[79]

19th century

Charles Darwin in 1854, by then
working towards publication of
On the Origin of Species.

The nineteenth century is a particularly important period in the history of science since during this
era many distinguishing characteristics of contemporary modern science began to take shape such
as: transformation of the life and physical sciences, frequent use of precision instruments,
emergence of terms like "biologist", "physicist", "scientist"; slowly moving away from antiquated
labels like "natural philosophy" and "natural history", increased professionalization of those studying
nature lead to reduction in amateur naturalists, scientists gained cultural authority over many

dimensions of society, economic expansion and industrialization of numerous countries, thriving of
popular science writings and emergence of science journals.[15]
Early in the 19th century, John Dalton suggested the modern atomic theory, based on Democritus's
original idea of individible particles called atoms.

Combustion and chemical
reactions were studied by
Michael Faraday and reported
in his lectures before the Royal
Institution: The Chemical History
of a Candle, 1861.

Both John Herschel and William Whewell systematized methodology: the latter coined the term
scientist.[80] When Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species he established evolution as the
prevailing explanation of biological complexity. His theory of natural selection provided a natural
explanation of how species originated, but this only gained wide acceptance a century later.
The laws of conservation of energy, conservation of momentum and conservation of mass
suggested a highly stable universe where there could be little loss of resources. With the advent of
the steam engine and the industrial revolution, there was, however, an increased understanding that

： they did not have the same

all forms of energy as deﬁned in physics were not equally useful

energy quality. This realization led to the development of the laws of thermodynamics, in which the
cumulative energy quality of the universe is seen as constantly declining: the entropy of the universe
increases over time.
The electromagnetic theory was also established in the 19th century, and raised new questions
which could not easily be answered using Newton's framework. The phenomena that would allow
the deconstruction of the atom were discovered in the last decade of the 19th century: the
discovery of X-rays inspired the discovery of radioactivity. In the next year came the discovery of the
ﬁrst subatomic particle, the electron.

20th century

The DNA double helix is a
molecule that encodes the
genetic instructions used in the
development and functioning of
all known living organisms and
many viruses.

Einstein's theory of relativity and the development of quantum mechanics led to the replacement of
classical mechanics with a new physics which contains two parts that describe different types of
events in nature.
In the ﬁrst half of the century, the development of antibiotics and artiﬁcial fertilizer made global
human population growth possible. At the same time, the structure of the atom and its nucleus was
discovered, leading to the release of "atomic energy" (nuclear power). In addition, the extensive use
of technological innovation stimulated by the wars of this century led to revolutions in
transportation (automobiles and aircraft), the development of ICBMs, a space race, and a nuclear
arms race.
The molecular structure of DNA was discovered in 1953. The discovery of the cosmic microwave
background radiation in 1964 led to a rejection of the Steady State theory of the universe in favour
of the Big Bang theory of Georges Lemaître.
The development of spaceﬂight in the second half of the century allowed the ﬁrst astronomical
measurements done on or near other objects in space, including manned landings on the Moon.
Space telescopes lead to numerous discoveries in astronomy and cosmology.

Widespread use of integrated circuits in the last quarter of the 20th century combined with
communications satellites led to a revolution in information technology and the rise of the global
internet and mobile computing, including smartphones. The need for mass systematization of long,
intertwined causal chains and large amounts of data led to the rise of the ﬁelds of systems theory
and computer-assisted scientiﬁc modelling, which are partly based on the Aristotelian paradigm.[81]
Harmful environmental issues such as ozone depletion, acidiﬁcation, eutrophication and climate
change came to the public's attention in the same period, and caused the onset of environmental
science and environmental technology.

21st century
The Human Genome Project was completed in 2003, determining the sequence of nucleotide base
pairs that make up human DNA, and identifying and mapping all of the genes of the human
genome.[82] Induced pluripotent stem cells were developed in 2006, a technology allowing adult
cells to be transformed into stem cells capable of giving rise to any cell type found in the body,
potentially of huge importance to the ﬁeld of regenerative medicine.[83]

A simulated event in the CMS
detector of the Large Hadron
Collider, featuring a possible
appearance of the Higgs boson.

With the discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012, the last particle predicted by the Standard Model of
particle physics was found. In 2015, gravitational waves, predicted by general relativity a century
before, were ﬁrst observed.[84][85]

Branches of science
Main article: Branches of science

Modern science is commonly divided into three major branches that consist of the natural sciences,
social sciences, and formal sciences. Each of these branches comprise various specialized yet

overlapping scientiﬁc disciplines that often possess their own nomenclature and expertise.[86] Both
natural and social sciences are empirical sciences[87] as their knowledge are based on empirical
observations and are capable of being tested for its validity by other researchers working under the
same conditions.[88]
There are also closely related disciplines that use science, such as engineering and medicine.

Natural science
Main articles: Natural science and Outline of natural science

False-color composite of global oceanic and
terrestrial photoautotroph abundance by the
SeaWiFS Project, NASA/Goddard Space
Flight Center, and ORBIMAGE.

Natural science is concerned with the description, prediction, and understanding of natural
phenomena based on empirical evidence from observation and experimentation. It can be divided
into two main branches: life science (or biological science) and physical science. Physical science
is subdivided into branches, including physics, chemistry, astronomy and earth science. These two
branches may be further divided into more specialized disciplines. Modern natural science is the
successor to the natural philosophy that began in Ancient Greece. Galileo, Descartes, Bacon, and
Newton debated the beneﬁts of using approaches which were more mathematical and more
experimental in a methodical way. Still, philosophical perspectives, conjectures, and
presuppositions, often overlooked, remain necessary in natural science.[89] Systematic data
collection, including discovery science, succeeded natural history, which emerged in the 16th
century by describing and classifying plants, animals, minerals, and so on.[90] Today, "natural history"
suggests observational descriptions aimed at popular audiences.[91]

Social science
Main articles: Social science and Outline of social science

In economics, the supply and demand
model describes how prices vary as a
result of a balance between product
availability and demand.

Social science is concerned with society and the relationships among individuals within a society. It
has many branches that include, but are not limited to, anthropology, archaeology, communication
studies, economics, history, human geography, jurisprudence, linguistics, political science,
psychology, public health, and sociology. Social scientists may adopt various philosophical theories
to study individuals and society. For example, positivist social scientists use methods resembling
those of the natural sciences as tools for understanding society, and so deﬁne science in its stricter
modern sense. Interpretivist social scientists, by contrast, may use social critique or symbolic
interpretation rather than constructing empirically falsiﬁable theories, and thus treat science in its
broader sense. In modern academic practice, researchers are often eclectic, using multiple
methodologies (for instance, by combining both quantitative and qualitative research). The term
"social research" has also acquired a degree of autonomy as practitioners from various disciplines
share in its aims and methods.

Formal science
Main articles: Formal science and Outline of formal science

A humanoid robotic hand (see Shadow
Hand system).

Formal science is involved in the study of formal systems. It includes mathematics,[92][93] systems
theory, robotics, and theoretical computer science. The formal sciences share similarities with the
other two branches by relying on objective, careful, and systematic study of an area of knowledge.
They are, however, different from the empirical sciences as they rely exclusively on deductive
reasoning, without the need for empirical evidence, to verify their abstract concepts.[18][94][95] The
formal sciences are therefore a priori disciplines and because of this, there is disagreement on
whether they actually constitute a science.[16][17] Nevertheless, the formal sciences play an
important role in the empirical sciences. Calculus, for example, was initially invented to understand
motion in physics.[96] Natural and social sciences that rely heavily on mathematical applications
include mathematical physics, mathematical chemistry, mathematical biology, mathematical
ﬁnance, and mathematical economics.

Scientiﬁc research
See also: Research

Scientiﬁc research can be labeled as either basic or applied research. Basic research is the search
for knowledge and applied research is the search for solutions to practical problems using this
knowledge. Although some scientiﬁc research is applied research into speciﬁc problems, a great
deal of our understanding comes from the curiosity-driven undertaking of basic research. This leads
to options for technological advance that were not planned or sometimes even imaginable. This
point was made by Michael Faraday when allegedly in response to the question "what is the use of
basic research?" he responded: "Sir, what is the use of a new-born child?".[97] For example, research

into the effects of red light on the human eye's rod cells did not seem to have any practical purpose;
eventually, the discovery that our night vision is not troubled by red light would lead search and
rescue teams (among others) to adopt red light in the cockpits of jets and helicopters.[98]:106–10
Finally, even basic research can take unexpected turns, and there is some sense in which the
scientiﬁc method is built to harness luck.

Scientiﬁc method
Main article: Scientiﬁc method

The central star IRAS 10082-5647 was
captured by the Advanced Camera for
Surveys aboard the Hubble Space
Telescope.

Scientiﬁc research involves using the scientiﬁc method, which seeks to objectively explain the
events of nature in a reproducible way.[g] An explanatory thought experiment or hypothesis is put
forward as explanation using principles such as parsimony (also known as "Occam's Razor") and
are generally expected to seek consilience – ﬁtting well with other accepted facts related to the
phenomena.[99] This new explanation is used to make falsiﬁable predictions that are testable by
experiment or observation. The predictions are to be posted before a conﬁrming experiment or
observation is sought, as proof that no tampering has occurred. Disproof of a prediction is evidence
of progress.[h][i] This is done partly through observation of natural phenomena, but also through
experimentation that tries to simulate natural events under controlled conditions as appropriate to
the discipline (in the observational sciences, such as astronomy or geology, a predicted observation
might take the place of a controlled experiment). Experimentation is especially important in science
to help establish causal relationships (to avoid the correlation fallacy).
When a hypothesis proves unsatisfactory, it is either modiﬁed or discarded.[100] If the hypothesis
survived testing, it may become adopted into the framework of a scientiﬁc theory, a logically
reasoned, self-consistent model or framework for describing the behavior of certain natural

phenomena. A theory typically describes the behavior of much broader sets of phenomena than a
hypothesis; commonly, a large number of hypotheses can be logically bound together by a single
theory. Thus a theory is a hypothesis explaining various other hypotheses. In that vein, theories are
formulated according to most of the same scientiﬁc principles as hypotheses. In addition to testing
hypotheses, scientists may also generate a model, an attempt to describe or depict the
phenomenon in terms of a logical, physical or mathematical representation and to generate new
hypotheses that can be tested, based on observable phenomena.[101]
While performing experiments to test hypotheses, scientists may have a preference for one
outcome over another, and so it is important to ensure that science as a whole can eliminate this
bias.[102][103] This can be achieved by careful experimental design, transparency, and a thorough
peer review process of the experimental results as well as any conclusions.[104][105] After the results
of an experiment are announced or published, it is normal practice for independent researchers to
double-check how the research was performed, and to follow up by performing similar experiments
to determine how dependable the results might be.[106] Taken in its entirety, the scientiﬁc method
allows for highly creative problem solving while minimizing any effects of subjective bias on the
part of its users (especially the conﬁrmation bias).[107]
Role of mathematics
Main articles: Mathematics and Formal science

Calculus, the mathematics of
continuous change, underpins many of
the sciences.

Mathematics is essential in the formation of hypotheses, theories, and laws[108] in the natural and
social sciences. For example, it is used in quantitative scientiﬁc modeling, which can generate new
hypotheses and predictions to be tested. It is also used extensively in observing and collecting
measurements. Statistics, a branch of mathematics, is used to summarize and analyze data, which
allow scientists to assess the reliability and variability of their experimental results.

Computational science applies computing power to simulate real-world situations, enabling a better
understanding of scientiﬁc problems than formal mathematics alone can achieve. According to the
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, computation is now as important as theory and
experiment in advancing scientiﬁc knowledge.[109]
Veriﬁability
John Ziman points out that intersubjective veriﬁability is fundamental to the creation of all scientiﬁc
knowledge.[110]:44 Ziman shows how scientists can identify patterns to each other across centuries;
he refers to this ability as "perceptual consensibility."[111]:46 He then makes consensibility, leading to
consensus, the touchstone of reliable knowledge.[111]:104

Philosophy of science
See also: Philosophy of science

English philosopher and physician
John Locke (1632–1704), a leading
philosopher of British empiricism

Scientists usually take for granted a set of basic assumptions that are needed to justify the
scientiﬁc method: (1) that there is an objective reality shared by all rational observers; (2) that this
objective reality is governed by natural laws; (3) that these laws can be discovered by means of
systematic observation and experimentation.[24] Philosophy of science seeks a deep understanding
of what these underlying assumptions mean and whether they are valid.
The belief that scientiﬁc theories should and do represent metaphysical reality is known as realism.
It can be contrasted with anti-realism, the view that the success of science does not depend on it
being accurate about unobservable entities such as electrons. One form of anti-realism is idealism,
the belief that the mind or consciousness is the most basic essence, and that each mind generates

its own reality.[j] In an idealistic world view, what is true for one mind need not be true for other
minds.
There are different schools of thought in philosophy of science. The most popular position is
empiricism,[k] which holds that knowledge is created by a process involving observation and that
scientiﬁc theories are the result of generalizations from such observations.[112] Empiricism
generally encompasses inductivism, a position that tries to explain the way general theories can be
justiﬁed by the ﬁnite number of observations humans can make and hence the ﬁnite amount of
empirical evidence available to conﬁrm scientiﬁc theories. This is necessary because the number of
predictions those theories make is inﬁnite, which means that they cannot be known from the ﬁnite
amount of evidence using deductive logic only. Many versions of empiricism exist, with the
predominant ones being Bayesianism[113] and the hypothetico-deductive method.[114]:236

The Austrian-British philosopher of
science Karl Popper (1902–1994) in
1990. He is best known for his work on
empirical falsiﬁcation.

Empiricism has stood in contrast to rationalism, the position originally associated with Descartes,
which holds that knowledge is created by the human intellect, not by observation.[114]:20 Critical
rationalism is a contrasting 20th-century approach to science, ﬁrst deﬁned by Austrian-British
philosopher Karl Popper. Popper rejected the way that empiricism describes the connection
between theory and observation. He claimed that theories are not generated by observation, but
that observation is made in the light of theories and that the only way a theory can be affected by
observation is when it comes in conﬂict with it.[114]:63–67 Popper proposed replacing veriﬁability with
falsiﬁability as the landmark of scientiﬁc theories and replacing induction with falsiﬁcation as the
empirical method.[114]:68 Popper further claimed that there is actually only one universal method, not
speciﬁc to science: the negative method of criticism, trial and error.[115] It covers all products of the
human mind, including science, mathematics, philosophy, and art.[116]

Another approach, instrumentalism, colloquially termed "shut up and multiply,"[117] emphasizes the
utility of theories as instruments for explaining and predicting phenomena.[118] It views scientiﬁc
theories as black boxes with only their input (initial conditions) and output (predictions) being
relevant. Consequences, theoretical entities, and logical structure are claimed to be something that
should simply be ignored and that scientists shouldn't make a fuss about (see interpretations of
quantum mechanics). Close to instrumentalism is constructive empiricism, according to which the
main criterion for the success of a scientiﬁc theory is whether what it says about observable
entities is true.
Thomas Kuhn argued that the process of observation and evaluation takes place within a paradigm,
a logically consistent "portrait" of the world that is consistent with observations made from its
framing. He characterized normal science as the process of observation and "puzzle solving" which
takes place within a paradigm, whereas revolutionary science occurs when one paradigm overtakes
another in a paradigm shift.[119] Each paradigm has its own distinct questions, aims, and
interpretations. The choice between paradigms involves setting two or more "portraits" against the
world and deciding which likeness is most promising. A paradigm shift occurs when a signiﬁcant
number of observational anomalies arise in the old paradigm and a new paradigm makes sense of
them. That is, the choice of a new paradigm is based on observations, even though those
observations are made against the background of the old paradigm. For Kuhn, acceptance or
rejection of a paradigm is a social process as much as a logical process. Kuhn's position, however,
is not one of relativism.[120]
Finally, another approach often cited in debates of scientiﬁc skepticism against controversial
movements like "creation science" is methodological naturalism. Its main point is that a difference
between natural and supernatural explanations should be made and that science should be
restricted methodologically to natural explanations.[l] That the restriction is merely methodological
(rather than ontological) means that science should not consider supernatural explanations itself,
but should not claim them to be wrong either. Instead, supernatural explanations should be left a
matter of personal belief outside the scope of science. Methodological naturalism maintains that
proper science requires strict adherence to empirical study and independent veriﬁcation as a
process for properly developing and evaluating explanations for observable phenomena.[121] The
absence of these standards, arguments from authority, biased observational studies and other
common fallacies are frequently cited by supporters of methodological naturalism as characteristic
of the non-science they criticize.
Certainty and science
A scientiﬁc theory is empirical[k][122] and is always open to falsiﬁcation if new evidence is presented.
That is, no theory is ever considered strictly certain as science accepts the concept of fallibilism.[m]

The philosopher of science Karl Popper sharply distinguished truth from certainty. He wrote that
scientiﬁc knowledge "consists in the search for truth," but it "is not the search for certainty ... All
human knowledge is fallible and therefore uncertain."[123]:4
New scientiﬁc knowledge rarely results in vast changes in our understanding. According to
psychologist Keith Stanovich, it may be the media's overuse of words like "breakthrough" that leads
the public to imagine that science is constantly proving everything it thought was true to be
false.[98]:119–38 While there are such famous cases as the theory of relativity that required a
complete reconceptualization, these are extreme exceptions. Knowledge in science is gained by a
gradual synthesis of information from different experiments by various researchers across different
branches of science; it is more like a climb than a leap.[98]:123 Theories vary in the extent to which
they have been tested and veriﬁed, as well as their acceptance in the scientiﬁc community.[n] For
example, heliocentric theory, the theory of evolution, relativity theory, and germ theory still bear the
name "theory" even though, in practice, they are considered factual.[124] Philosopher Barry Stroud
adds that, although the best deﬁnition for "knowledge" is contested, being skeptical and
entertaining the possibility that one is incorrect is compatible with being correct. Therefore,
scientists adhering to proper scientiﬁc approaches will doubt themselves even once they possess
the truth.[125] The fallibilist C. S. Peirce argued that inquiry is the struggle to resolve actual doubt
and that merely quarrelsome, verbal, or hyperbolic doubt is fruitless[126] – but also that the inquirer
should try to attain genuine doubt rather than resting uncritically on common sense.[127] He held
that the successful sciences trust not to any single chain of inference (no stronger than its weakest
link) but to the cable of multiple and various arguments intimately connected.[128]
Stanovich also asserts that science avoids searching for a "magic bullet"; it avoids the single-cause
fallacy. This means a scientist would not ask merely "What is the cause of ...", but rather "What are
the most signiﬁcant causes of ...". This is especially the case in the more macroscopic ﬁelds of
science (e.g. psychology, physical cosmology).[98]:141–47 Research often analyzes few factors at
once, but these are always added to the long list of factors that are most important to
consider.[98]:141–47 For example, knowing the details of only a person's genetics, or their history and
upbringing, or the current situation may not explain a behavior, but a deep understanding of all these
variables combined can be very predictive.
Fringe science, pseudoscience, and junk science
An area of study or speculation that masquerades as science in an attempt to claim a legitimacy
that it would not otherwise be able to achieve is sometimes referred to as pseudoscience, fringe
science, or junk science.[o] Physicist Richard Feynman coined the term "cargo cult science" for
cases in which researchers believe they are doing science because their activities have the outward
appearance of science but actually lack the "kind of utter honesty" that allows their results to be

rigorously evaluated.[129] Various types of commercial advertising, ranging from hype to fraud, may
fall into these categories. Science has been described as "the most important tool" for separating
valid claims from invalid ones.[130]
There can also be an element of political or ideological bias on all sides of scientiﬁc debates.
Sometimes, research may be characterized as "bad science," research that may be well-intended but
is actually incorrect, obsolete, incomplete, or over-simpliﬁed expositions of scientiﬁc ideas. The
term "scientiﬁc misconduct" refers to situations such as where researchers have intentionally
misrepresented their published data or have purposely given credit for a discovery to the wrong
person.[131]

Scientiﬁc literature
Main article: Scientiﬁc literature

Cover of the ﬁrst volume of the
scientiﬁc journal Science in 1880.

Scientiﬁc research is published in an enormous range of scientiﬁc literature.[132] Scientiﬁc journals
communicate and document the results of research carried out in universities and various other
research institutions, serving as an archival record of science. The ﬁrst scientiﬁc journals, Journal
des Sçavans followed by the Philosophical Transactions, began publication in 1665. Since that time
the total number of active periodicals has steadily increased. In 1981, one estimate for the number
of scientiﬁc and technical journals in publication was 11,500.[133] The United States National Library
of Medicine currently indexes 5,516 journals that contain articles on topics related to the life
sciences. Although the journals are in 39 languages, 91 percent of the indexed articles are
published in English.[134]

Most scientiﬁc journals cover a single scientiﬁc ﬁeld and publish the research within that ﬁeld; the
research is normally expressed in the form of a scientiﬁc paper. Science has become so pervasive
in modern societies that it is generally considered necessary to communicate the achievements,
news, and ambitions of scientists to a wider populace.
Science magazines such as New Scientist, Science & Vie, and Scientiﬁc American cater to the needs
of a much wider readership and provide a non-technical summary of popular areas of research,
including notable discoveries and advances in certain ﬁelds of research. Science books engage the
interest of many more people. Tangentially, the science ﬁction genre, primarily fantastic in nature,
engages the public imagination and transmits the ideas, if not the methods, of science.
Recent efforts to intensify or develop links between science and non-scientiﬁc disciplines such as
literature or more speciﬁcally, poetry, include the Creative Writing Science resource developed
through the Royal Literary Fund.[135]

Practical impacts
Discoveries in fundamental science can be world-changing. For example:

Research

Impact
All electric appliances, dynamos, electric power
stations, modern electronics, including electric

Static electricity and magnetism (c. 1600)

lighting, television, electric heating, transcranial

Electric current (18th century)

magnetic stimulation, deep brain stimulation,
magnetic tape, loudspeaker, and the compass and
lightning rod.
Optics, hence ﬁber optic cable (1840s), modern

Diffraction (1665)

intercontinental communications, and cable TV
and internet.
Hygiene, leading to decreased transmission of

Germ theory (1700)

infectious diseases; antibodies, leading to
techniques for disease diagnosis and targeted
anticancer therapies.
Leading to the elimination of most infectious

Vaccination (1798)

diseases from developed countries and the
worldwide eradication of smallpox.

Photovoltaic effect (1839)

Solar cells (1883), hence solar power, solar
powered watches, calculators and other devices.

The strange orbit of Mercury (1859) and other research Satellite-based technology such as GPS (1973),
leading to special (1905) and general relativity (1916)

satnav and satellite communications.[p]
Radio had become used in innumerable ways
beyond its better-known areas of telephony, and
broadcast television (1927) and radio (1906)
entertainment. Other uses included – emergency

Radio waves (1887)

services, radar (navigation and weather prediction),
medicine, astronomy, wireless communications,
geophysics, and networking. Radio waves also led
researchers to adjacent frequencies such as
microwaves, used worldwide for heating and
cooking food.
Cancer treatment (1896), Radiometric dating

Radioactivity (1896) and antimatter (1932)

(1905), nuclear reactors (1942) and weapons
(1945), mineral exploration, PET scans (1961), and
medical research (via isotopic labeling).

X-rays (1896)

Medical imaging, including computed tomography.
Semiconductor devices (1906), hence modern

Crystallography and quantum mechanics (1900)

computing and telecommunications including the
integration with wireless devices: the mobile
phone,[p] LED lamps and lasers.

Plastics (1907)

Starting with Bakelite, many types of artiﬁcial
polymers for numerous applications in industry
and daily life.

Antibiotics (1880s, 1928)

Salvarsan, Penicillin, doxycycline etc.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1946),

Nuclear magnetic resonance (1930s)

magnetic resonance imaging (1971), functional
magnetic resonance imaging (1990s).

Scientiﬁc community
Main article: Scientiﬁc community

The scientiﬁc community is a group of all interacting scientists, along with their respective societies
and institutions.

Scientists
Main article: Scientist

German-born scientist Albert Einstein
(1879–1955) developed the theory of
relativity. He also won the Nobel Prize
in Physics in 1921 for his work in
theoretical physics.

Scientists are individuals who conduct scientiﬁc research to advance knowledge in an area of
interest.[136][137] The term scientist was coined by William Whewell in 1833. In modern times, many
professional scientists are trained in an academic setting and upon completion, attain an academic

degree, with the highest degree being a doctorate such as a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD),[138] Doctor
of Medicine (MD), or Doctor of Engineering (DEng). Many scientists pursue careers in various
sectors of the economy such as academia, industry, government, and nonproﬁt
environments.[139][140][141]
Scientists exhibit a strong curiosity about reality, with some scientists having a desire to apply
scientiﬁc knowledge for the beneﬁt of health, nations, environment, or industries. Other motivations
include recognition by their peers and prestige. The Nobel Prize, a widely regarded prestigious
award,[142] is awarded annually to those who have achieved scientiﬁc advances in the ﬁelds of
medicine, physics, chemistry, and economics.
Women in science
Main article: Women in science
Further information: Women in STEM ﬁelds

Marie Curie was the ﬁrst person to be
awarded two Nobel Prizes: Physics in
1903 and Chemistry in 1911.[143]

Science has historically been a male-dominated ﬁeld, with some notable exceptions.[q] Women
faced considerable discrimination in science, much as they did in other areas of male-dominated
societies, such as frequently being passed over for job opportunities and denied credit for their
work.[r] For example, Christine Ladd (1847–1930) was able to enter a PhD program as "C. Ladd";
Christine "Kitty" Ladd completed the requirements in 1882, but was awarded her degree only in
1926, after a career which spanned the algebra of logic (see truth table), color vision, and
psychology. Her work preceded notable researchers like Ludwig Wittgenstein and Charles Sanders

Peirce. The achievements of women in science have been attributed to their deﬁance of their
traditional role as laborers within the domestic sphere.[144]
In the late 20th century, active recruitment of women and elimination of institutional discrimination
on the basis of sex greatly increased the number of women scientists, but large gender disparities
remain in some ﬁelds; in the early 21st century over half of new biologists were female, while 80% of
PhDs in physics are given to men. In the early part of the 21st century, women in the United States
earned 50.3% of bachelor's degrees, 45.6% of master's degrees, and 40.7% of PhDs in science and
engineering ﬁelds. They earned more than half of the degrees in psychology (about 70%), social
sciences (about 50%), and biology (about 50-60%) but earned less than half the degrees in the
physical sciences, earth sciences, mathematics, engineering, and computer science.[145] Lifestyle
choice also plays a major role in female engagement in science; women with young children are
28% less likely to take tenure-track positions due to work-life balance issues,[146] and female
graduate students' interest in careers in research declines dramatically over the course of graduate
school, whereas that of their male colleagues remains unchanged.[147]

Learned societies
Further information: Learned society

Physicists in front of the Royal Society building in London (1952).

Learned societies for the communication and promotion of scientiﬁc thought and experimentation
have existed since the Renaissance.[148] Many scientists belong to a learned society that promotes
their respective scientiﬁc discipline, profession, or group of related disciplines.[149] Membership may
be open to all, may require possession of some qualiﬁcations, or may be an honor conferred by
election.[150] Membership often requires possession of some scientiﬁc credentials, or may be an
honor conferred by election. Most scientiﬁc societies are non-proﬁt organizations, and many are
professional associations. Their activities typically include holding regular conferences for the

presentation and discussion of new research results and publishing or sponsoring academic
journals in their discipline. Some also act as professional bodies, regulating the activities of their
members in the public interest or the collective interest of the membership. Scholars in the
sociology of science argue that learned societies are of key importance and their formation assists
in the emergence and development of new disciplines or professions.
The professionalization of science, begun in the 19th century, was partly enabled by the creation of
distinguished academy of sciences in a number of countries such as the Italian Accademia dei
Lincei in 1603,[151] the British Royal Society in 1660, the French Académie des Sciences in 1666,[152]
the American National Academy of Sciences in 1863, the German Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in 1911,
and the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1928. International scientiﬁc organizations, such as the
International Council for Science, have since been formed to promote cooperation between the
scientiﬁc communities of different nations.

Science and the public
"Science and society" redirects here. For the academic journal, see Science & Society.

Science policy
Main articles: Science policy, History of science policy, and Economics of science

The United Nations Global SciencePolicy-Business Forum on the
Environment in Nairobi, Kenya (2017).

Science policy is an area of public policy concerned with the policies that affect the conduct of the
scientiﬁc enterprise, including research funding, often in pursuance of other national policy goals
such as technological innovation to promote commercial product development, weapons
development, health care and environmental monitoring. Science policy also refers to the act of
applying scientiﬁc knowledge and consensus to the development of public policies. Science policy
thus deals with the entire domain of issues that involve the natural sciences. In accordance with
public policy being concerned about the well-being of its citizens, science policy's goal is to
consider how science and technology can best serve the public.

State policy has inﬂuenced the funding of public works and science for thousands of years,
particularly within civilizations with highly organized governments such as imperial China and the
Roman Empire. Prominent historical examples include the Great Wall of China, completed over the
course of two millennia through the state support of several dynasties, and the Grand Canal of the
Yangtze River, an immense feat of hydraulic engineering begun by Sunshu Ao (
Ximen Bao (

孫叔敖 7th c. BCE),

西⾨豹 5th c.BCE), and Shi Chi (4th c. BCE). This construction dates from the 6th

century BCE under the Sui Dynasty and is still in use today. In China, such state-supported
infrastructure and scientiﬁc research projects date at least from the time of the Mohists, who
inspired the study of logic during the period of the Hundred Schools of Thought and the study of
defensive fortiﬁcations like the Great Wall of China during the Warring States period.
Public policy can directly affect the funding of capital equipment and intellectual infrastructure for
industrial research by providing tax incentives to those organizations that fund research. Vannevar
Bush, director of the Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research and Development for the United States
government, the forerunner of the National Science Foundation, wrote in July 1945 that "Science is
a proper concern of government."[153]
Funding of science
Main article: Funding of science

The Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and
Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO) Main Entomology Building in
Australia

Scientiﬁc research is often funded through a competitive process in which potential research
projects are evaluated and only the most promising receive funding. Such processes, which are run
by government, corporations, or foundations, allocate scarce funds. Total research funding in most
developed countries is between 1.5% and 3% of GDP.[154] In the OECD, around two-thirds of research
and development in scientiﬁc and technical ﬁelds is carried out by industry, and 20% and 10%
respectively by universities and government. The government funding proportion in certain
industries is higher, and it dominates research in social science and humanities. Similarly, with
some exceptions (e.g. biotechnology) government provides the bulk of the funds for basic scientiﬁc
research. Many governments have dedicated agencies to support scientiﬁc research. Prominent

scientiﬁc organizations include the National Science Foundation in the United States, the National
Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council in Argentina, Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO) in Australia, Centre national de la recherche scientiﬁque in France, the
Max Planck Society and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in Germany, and CSIC in Spain. In
commercial research and development, all but the most research-oriented corporations focus more
heavily on near-term commercialisation possibilities rather than "blue-sky" ideas or technologies
(such as nuclear fusion).

Public awareness of science
Main article: Public awareness of science
Further information: Science outreach and Science communication

Dinosaur exhibit in the Houston Museum of
Natural Science

The public awareness of science relates to the attitudes, behaviors, opinions, and activities that
make up the relations between science and the general public. it integrates various themes and
activities such as science communication, science museums, science festivals, science fairs,
citizen science, and science in popular culture. Social scientists have devised various metrics to
measure the public understanding of science such as factual knowledge, self-reported knowledge,
and structural knowledge.[155][156]

Science journalism
Main article: Science journalism

The mass media face a number of pressures that can prevent them from accurately depicting
competing scientiﬁc claims in terms of their credibility within the scientiﬁc community as a whole.
Determining how much weight to give different sides in a scientiﬁc debate may require considerable
expertise regarding the matter.[157] Few journalists have real scientiﬁc knowledge, and even beat

reporters who know a great deal about certain scientiﬁc issues may be ignorant about other
scientiﬁc issues that they are suddenly asked to cover.[158][159]

Politicization of science
Main article: Politicization of science

Results of seven papers from 2004–2015 assessing
the overwhelming scientiﬁc consensus on manmade global warming (see Surveys of scientists'
views on climate change), in contrast to the political
controversy over this issue, particularly in the United
States.

Politicization of science occurs when government, business, or advocacy groups use legal or
economic pressure to inﬂuence the ﬁndings of scientiﬁc research or the way it is disseminated,
reported, or interpreted. Many factors can act as facets of the politicization of science such as
populist anti-intellectualism, perceived threats to religious beliefs, postmodernist subjectivism, and
fear for business interests.[160] Politicization of science is usually accomplished when scientiﬁc
information is presented in a way that emphasizes the uncertainty associated with the scientiﬁc
evidence.[161] Tactics such as shifting conversation, failing to acknowledge facts, and capitalizing
on doubt of scientiﬁc consensus have been used to gain more attention for views that have been
undermined by scientiﬁc evidence.[162] Examples of issues that have involved the politicization of
science include the global warming controversy, health effects of pesticides, and health effects of
tobacco.[162][163]

See also
Antiquarian science books
Criticism of science
Human timeline
Index of branches of science

Life timeline
List of scientiﬁc occupations
Normative science
Outline of science
Pathological science
Protoscience
Science in popular culture
Science wars
Scientiﬁc dissent
Sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge
Wissenschaft – all areas of scholarly study, including both sciences and non-sciences

Notes
a. "... modern science is a discovery as well as an invention. It was a discovery that nature generally
acts regularly enough to be described by laws and even by mathematics; and required invention to
devise the techniques, abstractions, apparatus, and organization for exhibiting the regularities and
securing their law-like descriptions."— Heilbron 2003, p. vii
"science" . Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. Merriam-Webster, Inc. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
"3 a: knowledge or a system of knowledge covering general truths or the operation of general laws
especially as obtained and tested through scientiﬁc method b: such knowledge or such a system of
knowledge concerned with the physical world and its phenomena."
b. "The historian ... requires a very broad deﬁnition of "science" – one that ... will help us to
understand the modern scientiﬁc enterprise. We need to be broad and inclusive, rather than narrow
and exclusive ... and we should expect that the farther back we go [in time] the broader we will need
to be." — (Lindberg 2007, p. 3), which further cites Pingree, David (December 1992). "Hellenophilia
versus the History of Science". Isis. 4 (4): 554–63. Bibcode:1992Isis...83..554P .
doi:10.1086/356288 . JSTOR 234257 .
c. Alhacen had access to the optics books of Euclid and Ptolemy, as is shown by the title of his lost
work A Book in which I have Summarized the Science of Optics from the Two Books of Euclid and
Ptolemy, to which I have added the Notions of the First Discourse which is Missing from Ptolemy's
Book From Ibn Abi Usaibia's catalog, as cited in (Smith 2001):91(vol .1), p. xv

d. "[Ibn al-Haytham] followed Ptolemy's bridge building ... into a grand synthesis of light and vision.
Part of his effort consisted in devising ranges of experiments, of a kind probed before but now
undertaken on larger scale."— Cohen 2010, p. 59
e. The translator, Gerard of Cremona (c. 1114–1187), inspired by his love of the Almagest, came to
Toledo, where he knew he could ﬁnd the Almagest in Arabic. There he found Arabic books of every
description, and learned Arabic in order to translate these books into Latin, being aware of 'the
poverty of the Latins'. —As cited by Burnett, Charles (2002). "The Coherence of the Arabic-Latin
Translation Program in Toledo in the Twelfth Century". Science in Context. 14: 249–88.
doi:10.1017/S0269889701000096 .
f. Kepler, Johannes (1604) Ad Vitellionem paralipomena, quibus astronomiae pars opticae traditur
(Supplements to Witelo, in which the optical part of astronomy is treated) as cited in Smith, A. Mark
(January 1, 2004). "What Is the History of Medieval Optics Really about?". Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society. 148 (2): 180–94. JSTOR 1558283 . PMID 15338543 .
The full title translation is from p. 60 of James R. Voelkel (2001) Johannes Kepler and the New
Astronomy Oxford University Press. Kepler was driven to this experiment after observing the
partial solar eclipse at Graz, July 10, 1600. He used Tycho Brahe's method of observation,
which was to project the image of the Sun on a piece of paper through a pinhole aperture,
instead of looking directly at the Sun. He disagreed with Brahe's conclusion that total eclipses
of the Sun were impossible, because there were historical accounts of total eclipses. Instead
he deduced that the size of the aperture controls the sharpness of the projected image (the
larger the aperture, the more accurate the image – this fact is now fundamental for optical
system design). Voelkel, p. 61, notes that Kepler's experiments produced the ﬁrst correct
account of vision and the eye, because he realized he could not accurately write about
astronomical observation by ignoring the eye.
g. di Francia 1976, p. 13: "The amazing point is that for the ﬁrst time since the discovery of
mathematics, a method has been introduced, the results of which have an intersubjective value!"
(Author's punctuation)
h. di Francia 1976, pp. 4–5: "One learns in a laboratory; one learns how to make experiments only by
experimenting, and one learns how to work with his hands only by using them. The ﬁrst and
fundamental form of experimentation in physics is to teach young people to work with their hands.
Then they should be taken into a laboratory and taught to work with measuring instruments – each
student carrying out real experiments in physics. This form of teaching is indispensable and cannot
be read in a book."
i. Fara 2009, p. 204: "Whatever their discipline, scientists claimed to share a common scientiﬁc
method that ... distinguished them from non-scientists."

j. This realization is the topic of intersubjective veriﬁability, as recounted, for example, by Max Born
(1949, 1965) Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance , who points out that all knowledge, including
natural or social science, is also subjective. p. 162: "Thus it dawned upon me that fundamentally
everything is subjective, everything without exception. That was a shock."
k. In his investigation of the law of falling bodies, Galileo (1638) serves as example for scientiﬁc
investigation: Two New Sciences "A piece of wooden moulding or scantling, about 12 cubits long,
half a cubit wide, and three ﬁnger-breadths thick, was taken; on its edge was cut a channel a little
more than one ﬁnger in breadth; having made this groove very straight, smooth, and polished, and
having lined it with parchment, also as smooth and polished as possible, we rolled along it a hard,
smooth, and very round bronze ball. Having placed this board in a sloping position, by lifting one end
some one or two cubits above the other, we rolled the ball, as I was just saying, along the channel,
noting, in a manner presently to be described, the time required to make the descent. We ... now
rolled the ball only one-quarter the length of the channel; and having measured the time of its
descent, we found it precisely one-half of the former. Next we tried other distances, comparing the
time for the whole length with that for the half, or with that for two-thirds, or three-fourths, or indeed
for any fraction; in such experiments, repeated many, many, times." Galileo solved the problem of
time measurement by weighing a jet of water collected during the descent of the bronze ball, as
stated in his Two New Sciences.
l. Godfrey-Smith 2003, p. 151 credits Willard Van Orman Quine (1969) "Epistemology Naturalized"
Ontological Relativity and Other Essays New York: Columbia University Press, as well as John Dewey,
with the basic ideas of naturalism – Naturalized Epistemology, but Godfrey-Smith diverges from
Quine's position: according to Godfrey-Smith, "A naturalist can think that science can contribute to
answers to philosophical questions, without thinking that philosophical questions can be replaced
by science questions.".
m. "No amount of experimentation can ever prove me right; a single experiment can prove me
wrong." —Albert Einstein, noted by Alice Calaprice (ed. 2005) The New Quotable Einstein Princeton
University Press and Hebrew University of Jerusalem, ISBN 0-691-12074-9 p. 291. Calaprice
denotes this not as an exact quotation, but as a paraphrase of a translation of A. Einstein's
"Induction and Deduction". Collected Papers of Albert Einstein 7 Document 28. Volume 7 is The Berlin
Years: Writings, 1918–1921. A. Einstein; M. Janssen, R. Schulmann, et al., eds.
n. Fleck, Ludwik (1979). Trenn, Thaddeus J.; Merton, Robert K (eds.). Genesis and Development of a
Scientiﬁc Fact. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-25325-1. Claims that before a
speciﬁc fact "existed", it had to be created as part of a social agreement within a community. Steven
Shapin (1980) "A view of scientiﬁc thought" Science ccvii (Mar 7, 1980) 1065–66 states "[To Fleck,]
facts are invented, not discovered. Moreover, the appearance of scientiﬁc facts as discovered things
is itself a social construction: a made thing. "

o. "Pseudoscientiﬁc – pretending to be scientiﬁc, falsely represented as being scientiﬁc", from the
Oxford American Dictionary, published by the Oxford English Dictionary; Hansson, Sven Ove
(1996)."Deﬁning Pseudoscience", Philosophia Naturalis, 33: 169–76, as cited in "Science and
Pseudo-science"

(2008) in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. The Stanford article states:

"Many writers on pseudoscience have emphasized that pseudoscience is non-science posing as
science. The foremost modern classic on the subject (Gardner 1957) bears the title Fads and
Fallacies in the Name of Science. According to Brian Baigrie (1988, 438), "[w]hat is objectionable
about these beliefs is that they masquerade as genuinely scientiﬁc ones." These and many other
authors assume that to be pseudoscientiﬁc, an activity or a teaching has to satisfy the following
two criteria (Hansson 1996): (1) it is not scientiﬁc, and (2) its major proponents try to create the
impression that it is scientiﬁc".
For example, Hewitt et al. Conceptual Physical Science Addison Wesley; 3 edition (July 18,
2003) ISBN 0-321-05173-4, Bennett et al. The Cosmic Perspective 3e Addison Wesley; 3 edition
(July 25, 2003) ISBN 0-8053-8738-2; See also, e.g., Gauch HG Jr. Scientiﬁc Method in Practice
(2003).
A 2006 National Science Foundation report on Science and engineering indicators quoted
Michael Shermer's (1997) deﬁnition of pseudoscience: '"claims presented so that they appear
[to be] scientiﬁc even though they lack supporting evidence and plausibility" (p. 33). In contrast,
science is "a set of methods designed to describe and interpret observed and inferred
phenomena, past or present, and aimed at building a testable body of knowledge open to
rejection or conﬁrmation" (p. 17)'.Shermer M. (1997). Why People Believe Weird Things:
Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time. New York: W. H. Freeman and
Company. ISBN 978-0-7167-3090-3. as cited by National Science Board. National Science
Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics (2006). "Science and Technology: Public
Attitudes and Understanding" . Science and engineering indicators 2006. Archived from the
original

on February 1, 2013.

"A pretended or spurious science; a collection of related beliefs about the world mistakenly
regarded as being based on scientiﬁc method or as having the status that scientiﬁc truths now
have," from the Oxford English Dictionary, second edition 1989.
p. Evicting Einstein , March 26, 2004, NASA. "Both [relativity and quantum mechanics] are extremely
successful. The Global Positioning System (GPS), for instance, wouldn't be possible without the theory
of relativity. Computers, telecommunications, and the Internet, meanwhile, are spin-offs of quantum
mechanics."
q. Women in science have included:
Hypatia (c. 350–415 CE), of the Library of Alexandria.

Trotula of Salerno, a physician c. 1060 CE.
Caroline Herschel, one of the ﬁrst professional astronomers of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Christine Ladd-Franklin, a doctoral student of C.S. Peirce, who published Wittgenstein's
proposition 5.101 in her dissertation, 40 years before Wittgenstein's publication of Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus.
Henrietta Leavitt, a professional human computer and astronomer, who ﬁrst published the
signiﬁcant relationship between the luminosity of Cepheid variable stars and their distance
from Earth. This allowed Hubble to make the discovery of the expanding universe, which led to
the Big Bang theory.
Emmy Noether, who proved the conservation of energy and other constants of motion in 1915.
Marie Curie, who made discoveries relating to radioactivity along with her husband, and for
whom Curium is named.
Rosalind Franklin, who worked with X-ray diffraction.
Jocelyn Bell Burnell, at ﬁrst not allowed to study science in her preparatory school, persisted,
and was the ﬁrst to observe and precisely analyse the radio pulsars, for which her supervisor
was recognized by the 1974 Nobel prize in Physics. (Later awarded a Special Breakthrough
prize in Physics in 2018, she donated the cash award in order that women, ethnic minority, and
refugee students might become physics researchers.)
In 2018 Donna Strickland became the third woman (the second being Maria Goeppert-Mayer in
1962) to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics, for her work in chirped pulse ampliﬁcation of
lasers. Frances H. Arnold became the ﬁfth woman to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for the directed evolution of enzymes.
See the project of Jess Wade (Christina Zdanowicz (27 July 2018),
Wikipedia entry a day to recognize women in science

CNN A physicist is writing one

)

r. Nina Byers, Contributions of 20th Century Women to Physics

which provides details on 83

female physicists of the 20th century. By 1976, more women were physicists, and the 83 who were
detailed were joined by other women in noticeably larger numbers.

References
1. Harper, Douglas. "science" . Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 20, 2014.
2. Wilson, E.O. (1999). "The natural sciences". Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge (Reprint ed.). New
York, New York: Vintage. pp. 49–71. ISBN 978-0-679-76867-8.

3. Lindberg, David C. (2007). "Science before the Greeks". The beginnings of Western science: the
European Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical, religious, and institutional context (Second ed.).
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. pp. 1–27. ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
4. Grant, Edward (2007). "Ancient Egypt to Plato". A History of Natural Philosophy: From the Ancient
World to the Nineteenth Century (First ed.). New York, New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–
26. ISBN 978-052-1-68957-1.
5. Lindberg, David C. (2007). "The revival of learning in the West". The beginnings of Western science:
the European Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical, religious, and institutional context (Second ed.).
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. pp. 193–224. ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
6. Lindberg, David C. (2007). "Islamic science". The beginnings of Western science: the European
Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical, religious, and institutional context (Second ed.). Chicago, Illinois:
University of Chicago Press. pp. 163–92. ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
7. Lindberg, David C. (2007). "The recovery and assimilation of Geek and Islamic science". The
beginnings of Western science: the European Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical, religious, and
institutional context (2nd ed.). Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. pp. 225–53. ISBN 9780-226-48205-7.
8. Principe, Lawrence M. (2011). "Introduction". Scientiﬁc Revolution: A Very Short Introduction (First
ed.). New York, New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 1–3. ISBN 978-0-199-56741-6.
9. Lindberg, David C. (1990). "Conceptions of the Scientiﬁc Revolution from Baker to Butterﬁeld: A
preliminary sketch". In David C. Lindberg; Robert S. Westman (eds.). Reappraisals of the Scientiﬁc
Revolution (First ed.). Chicago, Illinois: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–26. ISBN 978-0-52134262-9.
10. Lindberg, David C. (2007). "The legacy of ancient and medieval science". The beginnings of
Western science: the European Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical, religious, and institutional context
(2nd ed.). Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. pp. 357–368. ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
11. Del Soldato, Eva (2016). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Fall

2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
12. Grant, Edward (2007). "Transformation of medieval natural philosophy from the early period
modern period to the end of the nineteenth century". A History of Natural Philosophy: From the
Ancient World to the Nineteenth Century (First ed.). New York, New York: Cambridge University Press.
pp. 274–322. ISBN 978-052-1-68957-1.
13. Cahan, David, ed. (2003). From Natural Philosophy to the Sciences: Writing the History of
Nineteenth-Century Science. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-08928-7.

14. The Oxford English Dictionary dates the origin of the word "scientist" to 1834.
15. Lightman, Bernard (2011). "13. Science and the Public". In Shank, Michael; Numbers, Ronald;
Harrison, Peter (eds.). Wrestling with Nature : From Omens to Science. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. p. 367. ISBN 978-0226317830.
16. Bishop, Alan (1991). "Environmental activities and mathematical culture" . Mathematical
Enculturation: A Cultural Perspective on Mathematics Education. Norwell, Massachusetts: Kluwer
Academic Publishers. pp. 20–59. ISBN 978-0-792-31270-3.
17. Bunge, Mario (1998). "The Scientiﬁc Approach". Philosophy of Science: Volume 1, From Problem
to Theory. 1 (revised ed.). New York, New York: Routledge. pp. 3–50. ISBN 978-0-765-80413-6.
18. Fetzer, James H. (2013). "Computer reliability and public policy: Limits of knowledge of
computer-based systems". Computers and Cognition: Why Minds are not Machines (1st ed.).
Newcastle, United Kingdom: Kluwer Academic Publishers. pp. 271–308. ISBN 978-1-443-81946-6.
19. Fischer, M.R.; Fabry, G (2014). "Thinking and acting scientiﬁcally: Indispensable basis of medical
education" . GMS Zeitschrift für Medizinische Ausbildung. 31 (2): Doc24.
doi:10.3205/zma000916 . PMC 4027809 . PMID 24872859 .
20. Abraham, Reem Rachel (2004). "Clinically oriented physiology teaching: strategy for developing
critical-thinking skills in undergraduate medical students". Advances in Physiology Education. 28 (3):
102–04. doi:10.1152/advan.00001.2004 . PMID 15319191 .
21. Sinclair, Marius. "On the Differences between the Engineering and Scientiﬁc Methods" . The
International Journal of Engineering Education.
22. "Engineering Technology :: Engineering Technology :: Purdue School of Engineering and
Technology, IUPUI" . www.engr.iupui.edu. Retrieved September 7, 2018.
23. Grant, Edward (January 1, 1997). "History of Science: When Did Modern Science Begin?". The
American Scholar. 66 (1): 105–113. JSTOR 41212592 .
24. Heilbron 2003, p. vii

司⾺遷, d. 86 BCE) in his Records of the Grand Historian (太史公書) covering some
2500 years of Chinese history, records Sunshu Ao (孫叔敖, ﬂ. c. 630–595 BCE – Zhou dynasty), the
25. Sima Qian (

ﬁrst known hydraulic engineer of China, cited in (Joseph Needham et.al (1971) Science and
Civilisation in China 4.3 p. 271) as having built a reservoir which has lasted to this day.
26. Rochberg, Francesca (2011). "Ch.1 Natural Knowledge in Ancient Mesopotamia". In Shank,
Michael; Numbers, Ronald; Harrison, Peter (eds.). Wrestling with Nature : From Omens to Science.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0226317830.

27. McIntosh, Jane R. (2005). Ancient Mesopotamia: New Perspectives . Santa Barbara, California,
Denver, Colorado, and Oxford, England: ABC-CLIO. pp. 273–76. ISBN 978-1-57607-966-9.
28. A. Aaboe (May 2, 1974). "Scientiﬁc Astronomy in Antiquity". Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society. 276 (1257): 21–42. Bibcode:1974RSPTA.276...21A . doi:10.1098/rsta.1974.0007 .
JSTOR 74272 .
29. R D. Biggs (2005). "Medicine, Surgery, and Public Health in Ancient Mesopotamia". Journal of
Assyrian Academic Studies. 19 (1): 7–18.
30. Lehoux, Daryn (2011). "2. Natural Knowledge in the Classical World". In Shank, Michael;
Numbers, Ronald; Harrison, Peter (eds.). Wrestling with Nature : From Omens to Science. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0226317830.
31. See the quotation in Homer (8th century BCE) Odyssey 10.302–03
32. "Progress or Return" in An Introduction to Political Philosophy: Ten Essays by Leo Strauss
(Expanded version of Political Philosophy: Six Essays by Leo Strauss, 1975.) Ed. Hilail Gilden. Detroit:
Wayne State UP, 1989.
33. Cropsey; Strauss (eds.). History of Political Philosophy (3rd ed.). p. 209.
34. O'Grady, Patricia F. (2016). Thales of Miletus: The Beginnings of Western Science and
Philosophy . New York City, New York and London, England: Routledge. p. 245. ISBN 978-0-75460533-1. Archived

from the original on January 29, 2018.

35. Burkert, Walter (June 1, 1972). Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism . Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-53918-1. Archived

from the original on

January 29, 2018.
36. Pullman, Bernard (1998). The Atom in the History of Human Thought . pp. 31–33.
Bibcode:1998ahht.book.....P . ISBN 978-0-19-515040-7.
37. Cohen, Henri; Lefebvre, Claire, eds. (2017). Handbook of Categorization in Cognitive Science
(Second ed.). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier. p. 427. ISBN 978-0-08-101107-2.
38. Margotta, Roberto (1968). The Story of Medicine . New York City, New York: Golden Press.
39. Touwaide, Alain (2005). Glick, Thomas F.; Livesey, Steven; Wallis, Faith (eds.). Medieval Science,
Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia . New York City, New York and London, England:
Routledge. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-415-96930-7.
40. Leff, Samuel; Leff, Vera (1956). From Witchcraft to World Health . London, England: Macmillan.
41. Mitchell, Jacqueline S. (February 18, 2003). "The Origins of Science" . Scientiﬁc American
Frontiers. PBS. Archived from the original

on March 3, 2003. Retrieved November 3, 2016.

42. "Plato, Apology" . p. 17. Archived

from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved

November 1, 2017.
43. "Plato, Apology" . p. 27. Archived

from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved

November 1, 2017.
44. "Plato, Apology, section 30" . Perseus Digital Library. Tufts University. 1966. Archived

from the

original on January 27, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
45. Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics

(H. Rackham ed.). Archived

from the original on March 17,

2012. 1139b
46. McClellan III, James E.; Dorn, Harold (2015). Science and Technology in World History: An
Introduction . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 99–100. ISBN 978-1-42141776-9.
47. Edwards, C.H. Jr. (1979). The Historical Development of the Calculus

(First ed.). New York City,

New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-387-94313-8.
48. Lawson, Russell M. (2004). Science in the Ancient World: An Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara,
California: ABC-CLIO. pp. 190–91. ISBN 978-1-85109-539-1.
49. Murphy, Trevor Morgan (2004). Pliny the Elder's Natural History: The Empire in the Encyclopedia .
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780199262885.
50. Doode, Aude (2010). Pliny's Encyclopedia: The Reception of the Natural History . Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9781139484534.
51. Smith, A. Mark (June 2004), "What is the History of Medieval Optics Really About?", Proceedings
of the American Philosophical Society, 148 (2): 180–94, JSTOR 1558283 , PMID 15338543
52. Lindberg, David. (1992) The Beginnings of Western Science. University of Chicago Press. p. 162.
53. Wildberg, Christian (May 1, 2018). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
54. Aristotle, Physics II, 3, and Metaphysics V, 2
55. Grant, Edward (1996). The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious,
Institutional and Intellectual Contexts . Cambridge Studies in the History of Science. Cambridge
University Press. pp. 7–17. ISBN 0521567629.
56. Grant, Edward (2007). "Islam and the eastward shift of Aristotelian natural philosophy". A History
of Natural Philosophy: From the Ancient World to the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press.
pp. 62–67. ISBN 978-0-521-68957-1.

57. The Cambridge history of Iran. Fisher, W.B. (William Bayne). Cambridge: University Press. 1968–
1991. ISBN 978-0521200936. OCLC 745412 .
58. "Bayt al-Hikmah" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived

from the original on November 4, 2016.

Retrieved November 3, 2016.
59. Klein-Frank, F. Al-Kindi. In Leaman, O & Nasr, H (2001). History of Islamic Philosophy. London:
Routledge. p. 165. Felix Klein-Frank (2001) Al-Kindi, pp. 166–67. In Oliver Leaman & Hossein Nasr.
History of Islamic Philosophy. London: Routledge.
60. "Science in Islam". Oxford Dictionary of the Middle Ages. 2009.
61. Toomer, G.J. (1964). "Reviewed work: Ibn al-Haythams Weg zur Physik, Matthias Schramm". Isis.
55 (4): 463–65. JSTOR 228328 . See p. 464: "Schramm sums up [Ibn Al-Haytham's] achievement in
the development of scientiﬁc method.", p. 465: "Schramm has demonstrated .. beyond any dispute
that Ibn al-Haytham is a major ﬁgure in the Islamic scientiﬁc tradition, particularly in the creation of
experimental techniques." p. 465: "only when the inﬂuence of ibn al-Haytam and others on the
mainstream of later medieval physical writings has been seriously investigated can Schramm's
claim that ibn al-Haytam was the true founder of modern physics be evaluated."
62. Selin, H (2006). Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western
Cultures. pp. 155–156. Bibcode:2008ehst.book.....S . ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2.
63. Numbers, Ronald (2009). Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths about Science and Religion .
Harvard University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-674-03327-6.
64. "Debunking a myth" . April 7, 2011.
65. Lindberg, D. (1992) The Beginnings of Western Science Chicago. University of Chicago Press.
p.204.
66. Smith 2001
67. McGinnis, Jon (2010). The Canon of Medicine. Oxford University. p. 227.
68. Lindberg, David (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science . University of Chicago Press.
p. 162. ISBN 9780226482040.
69. "St. Albertus Magnus | German theologian, scientist, and philosopher" . Archived
original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
70. Smith 2001:Book I, [6.54]. p. 372

from the

71. Smith, A. Mark (2001). "Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English
Translation and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's "De aspectibus", the Medieval
Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's "Kitāb al-Manāẓir": Volume One". Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society. 91 (4): i–337. JSTOR 3657358 .
72. Smith, A. Mark (1981). "Getting the Big Picture in Perspectivist Optics". Isis. 72 (4): 568–89.
doi:10.1086/352843 . JSTOR 231249 .
73. Goldstein, Bernard R (2016). "Copernicus and the Origin of his Heliocentric System". Journal for
the History of Astronomy. 33 (3): 219–35. doi:10.1177/002182860203300301 .
74. Cohen, H. Floris (2010). How modern science came into the world. Four civilizations, one 17thcentury breakthrough (Second ed.). Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
ISBN 9789089642394.
75. "Galileo and the Birth of Modern Science". American Heritage of Invention and Technology. 24.
76. van Helden, Al (1995). "Pope Urban VIII" . The Galileo Project. Archived

from the original on

November 11, 2016. Retrieved November 3, 2016.
77. Freudenthal, Gideon; McLaughlin, Peter (May 20, 2009). The Social and Economic Roots of the
Scientiﬁc Revolution: Texts by Boris Hessen and Henryk Grossmann . Springer Science & Business
Media. ISBN 9781402096044.
78. see Hall (1954), iii; Mason (1956), 223.
79. Cassels, Alan. Ideology and International Relations in the Modern World. p. 2.
80. Ross, Sydney (1962). "Scientist: The story of a word"

(PDF). Annals of Science. 18 (2): 65–85.

doi:10.1080/00033796200202722 . Retrieved March 8, 2011. To be exact, the person who coined
the term scientist was referred to in Whewell 1834 only as "some ingenious gentleman." Ross added
a comment that this "some ingenious gentleman" was Whewell himself, without giving the reason
for the identiﬁcation. Ross 1962, p. 72.
81. von Bertalanffy, Ludwig (1972). "The History and Status of General Systems Theory". The
Academy of Management Journal. 15 (4): 407–26. doi:10.2307/255139 . JSTOR 255139 .
82. Naidoo, Nasheen; Pawitan, Yudi; Soong, Richie; Cooper, David N.; Ku, Chee-Seng (October 2011).
"Human genetics and genomics a decade after the release of the draft sequence of the human
genome" . Human Genomics. 5 (6): 577–622. doi:10.1186/1479-7364-5-6-577 . PMC 3525251 .
PMID 22155605 .
83. Rashid, S. Tamir; Alexander, Graeme J.M. (March 2013). "Induced pluripotent stem cells: from
Nobel Prizes to clinical applications". Journal of Hepatology. 58 (3): 625–629.
doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2012.10.026 . ISSN 1600-0641 . PMID 23131523 .

84. Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T.; Addesso, P.;
Adhikari, R.X.; Adya, V.B.; Affeldt, C.; Afrough, M.; Agarwal, B.; Agathos, M.; Agatsuma, K.; Aggarwal,
N.; Aguiar, O.D.; Aiello, L.; Ain, A.; Ajith, P.; Allen, B.; Allen, G.; Allocca, A.; Altin, P.A.; Amato, A.;
Ananyeva, A.; Anderson, S.B.; Anderson, W.G.; Angelova, S.V.; et al. (2017). "Multi-messenger
Observations of a Binary Neutron Star Merger". The Astrophysical Journal. 848 (2): L12.
doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa91c9 .
85. Cho, Adrian (2017). "Merging neutron stars generate gravitational waves and a celestial light
show". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aar2149 .
86. "Scientiﬁc Method: Relationships Among Scientiﬁc Paradigms" . Seed Magazine. March 7,
2007. Archived

from the original on November 1, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2016.

87. Bunge, Mario Augusto (1998). Philosophy of Science: From Problem to Theory. Transaction
Publishers. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-7658-0413-6.
88. Popper 2002, p. 20.
89. Hugh G. Gauch Jr, Scientiﬁc Method in Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003),
pp. 71–73

Archived

2015-09-06 at the Wayback Machine

90. Oglivie 2008, pp. 1–2.
91. "Natural History" . Princeton University WordNet. Archived

from the original on March 3,

2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012.
92. Tomalin, Marcus (2006). Linguistics and the Formal Sciences. doi:10.2277/0521854814 .
93. Löwe, Benedikt (2002). "The Formal Sciences: Their Scope, Their Foundations, and Their Unity".
Synthese. 133: 5–11. doi:10.1023/a:1020887832028 .
94. Bill, Thompson (2007), "2.4 Formal Science and Applied Mathematics", The Nature of Statistical
Evidence, Lecture Notes in Statistics, 189 (1st ed.), Springer, p. 15
95. Popper 2002, pp. 10–11.
96. Mujumdar, Anshu Gupta; Singh, Tejinder (2016). "Cognitive science and the connection between
physics and mathematics". In Anthony Aguirre; Brendan Foster (eds.). Trick or Truth?: The
Mysterious Connection Between Physics and Mathematics. The Frontiers Collection (1st ed.).
Switzerland: SpringerNature. pp. 201–218. ISBN 978-3-319-27494-2.
97. Richard Dawkins (May 10, 2006). "To Live at All Is Miracle Enough" . RichardDawkins.net.
Archived from the original
98. Stanovich 2007

on January 19, 2012. Retrieved February 5, 2012.

99. Wilson, Edward (1999). Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-67976867-8.
100. Nola & Irzik 2005, p. 208.
101. Nola & Irzik 2005, pp. 199–201.
102. van Gelder, Tim (1999). " "Heads I win, tails you lose": A Foray Into the Psychology of
Philosophy"

(PDF). University of Melbourne. Archived from the original

(PDF) on April 9, 2008.

Retrieved March 28, 2008.
103. Pease, Craig (September 6, 2006). "Chapter 23. Deliberate bias: Conﬂict creates bad
science" . Science for Business, Law and Journalism. Vermont Law School. Archived from the
original

on June 19, 2010.

104. Shatz, David (2004). Peer Review: A Critical Inquiry. Rowman & Littleﬁeld. ISBN 978-0-74251434-8. OCLC 54989960 .
105. Krimsky, Sheldon (2003). Science in the Private Interest: Has the Lure of Proﬁts Corrupted the
Virtue of Biomedical Research. Rowman & Littleﬁeld. ISBN 978-0-7425-1479-9. OCLC 185926306 .
106. Bulger, Ruth Ellen; Heitman, Elizabeth; Reiser, Stanley Joel (2002). The Ethical Dimensions of the
Biological and Health Sciences (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00886-0.
OCLC 47791316 .
107. Backer, Patricia Ryaby (October 29, 2004). "What is the scientiﬁc method?" . San Jose State
University. Archived from the original

on April 8, 2008. Retrieved March 28, 2008.

108. Popper 2002, pp. 79–82.
109. "SIAM: Graduate Education for Computational Science and Engineering" . Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Archived

from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved

November 4, 2016.
110. Ziman cites Polanyi 1958 chapter 12, as referenced in Ziman 1978
111. Ziman 1978
112. "... [T]he logical empiricists thought that the great aim of science was to discover and establish
generalizations." —Godfrey-Smith 2003, p. 41
113. Godfrey-Smith 2003, p. 203.
114. Godfrey-Smith 2003
115. Popper called this Conjecture and Refutation. Godfrey-Smith 2003, pp. 117–18
116. Popper, Karl (1972). Objective Knowledge.

117. "Shut up and multiply" . LessWrong Wiki. September 13, 2015. Archived

from the original on

October 19, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2016.
118. Newton-Smith, W.H. (1994). The Rationality of Science. London: Routledge. p. 30. ISBN 978-07100-0913-5.
119. Bird, Alexander (2013). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Thomas Kuhn" . Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
120. T.S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 2nd. ed., Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1970,
p. 206. ISBN 0-226-45804-0
121. Brugger, E. Christian (2004). "Casebeer, William D. Natural Ethical Facts: Evolution,
Connectionism, and Moral Cognition". The Review of Metaphysics. 58 (2).
122. Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2015). "The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories" . Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved November 4, 2016.
123. Popper 1996.
124. Dawkins, Richard; Coyne, Jerry (September 2, 2005). "One side can be wrong" . The Guardian.
London. Archived

from the original on December 26, 2013.

125. "Barry Stroud on Scepticism" . philosophy bites. December 16, 2007. Archived

from the

original on January 23, 2012. Retrieved February 5, 2012.
126. Peirce (1877), "The Fixation of Belief", Popular Science Monthly, v. 12, pp. 1–15, see §IV on pp.
6–7

Archived

April 15, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Reprinted Collected Papers v. 5,

paragraphs 358–87 (see 374–76), Writings v. 3, pp. 242–57 (see 247–48), Essential Peirce v. 1, pp.
109–23 (see 114–15), and elsewhere.
127. Peirce (1905), "Issues of Pragmaticism", The Monist, v. XV, n. 4, pp. 481–99, see "Character V"
on p. 491 . Reprinted in Collected Papers v. 5, paragraphs 438–63 (see 451), Essential Peirce v. 2,
pp. 346–59 (see 353), and elsewhere.
128. Peirce (1868), "Some Consequences of Four Incapacities", Journal of Speculative Philosophy v.
2, n. 3, pp. 140–57, see p. 141

Archived

April 15, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Reprinted in

Collected Papers, v. 5, paragraphs 264–317, Writings v. 2, pp. 211–42, Essential Peirce v. 1, pp. 28–
55, and elsewhere.
129. Feynman, Richard (1974). "Cargo Cult Science" . Center for Theoretical Neuroscience.
Columbia University. Archived from the original

on March 4, 2005. Retrieved November 4, 2016.

130. Novella, Steven, et al. The Skeptics' Guide to the Universe: How to Know What's Really Real in a
World Increasingly Full of Fake. Grand Central Publishing, 2018. pp. 162.

131. "Coping with fraud"

(PDF). The COPE Report 1999: 11–18. Archived from the original

(PDF)

on September 28, 2007. Retrieved July 21, 2011. "It is 10 years, to the month, since Stephen Lock ...
Reproduced with kind permission of the Editor, The Lancet."
132. Ziman, J.M. (1980). "The proliferation of scientiﬁc literature: a natural process". Science. 208
(4442): 369–71. Bibcode:1980Sci...208..369Z . doi:10.1126/science.7367863 . PMID 7367863 .
133. Subramanyam, Krishna; Subramanyam, Bhadriraju (1981). Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
Resources. CRC Press. ISBN 978-0-8247-8297-9. OCLC 232950234 .
134. "MEDLINE Fact Sheet" . Washington DC: United States National Library of Medicine.
Archived

from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved October 15, 2011.

135. Petrucci, Mario. "Creative Writing – Science" . Archived from the original

on January 6, 2009.

Retrieved April 27, 2008.
136. "Eusocial climbers"

(PDF). E.O. Wilson Foundation. Retrieved September 3, 2018. "But he’s not

a scientist, he’s never done scientiﬁc research. My deﬁnition of a scientist is that you can complete
the following sentence: ‘he or she has shown that...’,” Wilson says."
137. "Our deﬁnition of a scientist" . Science Council. Retrieved September 7, 2018. "A scientist is
someone who systematically gathers and uses research and evidence, making a hypothesis and
testing it, to gain and share understanding and knowledge."
138. Cyranoski, David; Gilbert, Natasha; Ledford, Heidi; Nayar, Anjali; Yahia, Mohammed (2011).
"Education: The PhD factory" . Nature. 472 (7343): 276–79. Bibcode:2011Natur.472..276C .
doi:10.1038/472276a . PMID 21512548 .
139. Kwok, Roberta (2017). "Flexible working: Science in the gig economy". Nature. 550: 419–21.
doi:10.1038/nj7677-549a .
140. Editorial, ed. (2007). "Many junior scientists need to take a hard look at their job prospects" .
Nature. 550. doi:10.1038/nj7677-549a .
141. Lee, Adrian; Dennis, Carina; Campbell, Phillip (2007). "Graduate survey: A love–hurt
relationship". Nature. 550: 549–52. doi:10.1038/nj7677-549a .
142. Stockton, Nick (October 7, 2014), "How did the Nobel Prize become the biggest award on
Earth?" , Wired, retrieved September 3, 2018
143. "Nobel Prize Facts" . Nobel Foundation. Archived
October 11, 2015.

from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved

144. Spanier, Bonnie (1995). "From Molecules to Brains, Normal Science Supports Sexist Beliefs
about Difference". Im/partial Science: Gender Identity in Molecular Biology. Indiana University Press.
ISBN 9780253209689.
145. Rosser, Sue V. (March 12, 2012). Breaking into the Lab: Engineering Progress for Women in
Science. New York: New York University Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-8147-7645-2.
146. Goulden, Mark; Frasch, Karie; Mason, Mary Ann (2009). Staying Competitive: Patching America's
Leaky Pipeline in the Sciences. University of Berkeley Law.
147. Change of Heart: Career intentions and the chemistry PhD. Royal Society of Chemistry. 2008.
148. Parrott, Jim (August 9, 2007). "Chronicle for Societies Founded from 1323 to 1599" . Scholarly
Societies Project. Archived

from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2007.

149. "The Environmental Studies Association of Canada - What is a Learned Society?" . Archived
from the original

on May 29, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2013.

150. "Learned societies & academies" . Archived from the original

on June 3, 2014. Retrieved

May 10, 2013.
151. "Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei"

(in Italian). 2006. Archived

from the original on February

28, 2010. Retrieved September 11, 2007.
152. Meynell, G.G. "The French Academy of Sciences, 1666–91: A reassessment of the French
Académie royale des sciences under Colbert (1666–83) and Louvois (1683–91)" . Archived from
the original

on January 18, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2011.

153. Bush, Vannevar (July 1945). "Science the Endless Frontier" . National Science Foundation.
Archived

from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2016.

154. "Main Science and Technology Indicators – 2008-1"
original

(PDF). OECD. Archived from the

(PDF) on October 19, 2010.

155. Ladwig, Peter (2012). "Perceived familiarity or factual knowledge? Comparing
operationalizations of scientiﬁc understanding". Science and Public Policy. 39 (6): 761–74.
doi:10.1093/scipol/scs048 .
156. Eveland, William (2004). "How Web Site Organization Inﬂuences Free Recall, Factual
Knowledge, and Knowledge Structure Density". Human Communication Research. 30 (2): 208–33.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.2004.tb00731.x .
157. Dickson, David (October 11, 2004). "Science journalism must keep a critical edge" . Science
and Development Network. Archived from the original

on June 21, 2010.

158. Mooney, Chris (November – December 2004). "Blinded By Science, How 'Balanced' Coverage
Lets the Scientiﬁc Fringe Hijack Reality" . 43 (4). Columbia Journalism Review. Archived

from the

original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2008.
159. McIlwaine, S.; Nguyen, D.A. (2005). "Are Journalism Students Equipped to Write About
Science?" . Australian Studies in Journalism. 14: 41–60. Archived

from the original on August 1,

2008. Retrieved February 20, 2008.
160. Goldberg, Jeanne (2017). "The Politicization of Scientiﬁc Issues: Looking through Galileo's
Lens or through the Imaginary Looking Glass" . Skeptical Inquirer. 41 (5): 34–39. Retrieved
August 16, 2018.
161. Bolsen, Toby; Druckman, James N. (2015). "Counteracting the Politicization of Science".
Journal of Communication (65): 746.
162. Freudenberg, William F. "Scientiﬁc Certainty Argumentation Methods (SCAMs): Science and the
Politics of Doubt". Sociological Inquiry. 78: 2–38. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682X.2008.00219

(inactive

November 9, 2018).
163. van der Linden, Sander; Leiserowitz, Anthony; Rosenthal, Seth; Maibach, Edward (2017).
"Inoculating the Public against Misinformation about Climate Change". Global Challenges. 1 (2): 1.
doi:10.1002/gch2.201600008 .

Sources
Crease, Robert P. (2009). The Great Equations. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-06204-5.
di Francia, Giuliano Toraldo (1976). The Investigation of the Physical World. Originally published in Italian as
L'Indagine del Mondo Fisico by Giulio Einaudi editore 1976; ﬁrst published in English by Cambridge University
Press 1981. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29925-1.
Fara, Patricia (2009). Science : a four thousand year history. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 408.
ISBN 978-0-19-922689-4.
Feyerabend, Paul (1993). Against Method (3rd ed.). London: Verso. ISBN 978-0-86091-646-8.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter (2003). Theory and Reality. Chicago 60637: University of Chicago. p. 272. ISBN 978-0226-30062-7.
Heilbron, J.L. (editor-in-chief) (2003). The Oxford Companion to the History of Modern Science. New York:
Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511229-0.
Lindberg, David C. (2007). The beginnings of Western science: the European Scientiﬁc tradition in philosophical,
religious, and institutional context (Second ed.). Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
Nola, Robert; Irzik, Gürol (2005). Philosophy, science, education and culture . Science & technology education
library. 28. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-3769-6.

Polanyi, Michael (1958). Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-67288-5.
Popper, Karl Raimund (1996) [1984]. In search of a better world: lectures and essays from thirty years . New
York: Routledge. New York, NY. Bibcode:1992sbwl.book.....P . ISBN 978-0-415-13548-1.
Popper, Karl R. (2002) [1959]. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. New York, NY: Routledge Classics. ISBN 9780-415-27844-7. OCLC 59377149 .
Stanovich, Keith E. (2007). How to Think Straight About Psychology. Boston: Pearson Education. ISBN 978-0205-68590-5.
Ziman, John (1978). Reliable knowledge: An exploration of the grounds for belief in science. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22087-3.

Further reading
Augros, Robert M., Stanciu, George N., The New Story of Science: mind and the universe, Lake Bluff, Ill.:
Regnery Gateway, c1984. ISBN 0-89526-833-7
Becker, Ernest (1968). The structure of evil; an essay on the uniﬁcation of the science of man. New York: G.
Braziller.
Burguete, Maria, and Lam, Lui, eds.(2014). All About Science: Philosophy, History, Sociology & Communication.
World Scientiﬁc: Singapore. ISBN 978-981-4472-92-0
Cole, K.C., Things your teacher never told you about science: Nine shocking revelations Newsday, Long Island,
New York, March 23, 1986, pp. 21+
Crease, Robert P. (2011). World in the Balance: the historic quest for an absolute system of measurement. New
York: W.W. Norton. p. 317. ISBN 978-0-393-07298-3.
Feyerabend, Paul (2005). Science, history of the philosophy, as cited in Honderich, Ted (2005). The Oxford
companion to philosophy. Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7.
OCLC 173262485 .
Feynman, Richard P. (1999). Robbins, Jeffrey (ed.). The pleasure of ﬁnding things out the best short works of
Richard P. Feynman. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Perseus Books. ISBN 978-0465013128.
Feynman, R.P. (1999). The Pleasure of Finding Things Out: The Best Short Works of Richard P. Feynman.
Perseus Books Group. ISBN 978-0-465-02395-0. OCLC 181597764 .
Feynman, Richard "Cargo Cult Science"
Gaukroger, Stephen (2006). The Emergence of a Scientiﬁc Culture: Science and the Shaping of Modernity
1210–1685. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-929644-6.
Gopnik, Alison, "Finding Our Inner Scientist" , Daedalus, Winter 2004.

Krige, John, and Dominique Pestre, eds., Science in the Twentieth Century, Routledge 2003, ISBN 0-41528606-9
Levin, Yuval (2008). Imagining the Future: Science and American Democracy. New York, Encounter Books.
ISBN 1-59403-209-2
Lindberg, D.C. (1976). Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, Thomas, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 1962.
William F., McComas (1998). "The principal elements of the nature of science: Dispelling the myths"

(PDF).

In McComas, William F. (ed.). The nature of science in science education: rationales and strategies. Springer.
ISBN 978-0-7923-6168-8.
Needham, Joseph (1954). "Science and Civilisation in China: Introductory Orientations". 1. Cambridge
University Press.
Obler, Paul C.; Estrin, Herman A. (1962). The New Scientist: Essays on the Methods and Values of Modern
Science. Anchor Books, Doubleday.
Papineau, David. (2005). Science, problems of the philosophy of., as cited in Honderich, Ted (2005). The
Oxford companion to philosophy. Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7.
OCLC 173262485 .
Parkin, D. (1991). "Simultaneity and Sequencing in the Oracular Speech of Kenyan Diviners". In Philip M. Peek
(ed.). African Divination Systems: Ways of Knowing. Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Russell, Bertrand (1985) [1952]. The Impact of Science on Society. London: Unwin. ISBN 978-0-04-300090-8.
Rutherford, F. James; Ahlgren, Andrew (1990). Science for all Americans. New York, NY: American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-506771-2.
Smith, A. Mark (2001). Written at Philadelphia. Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with
English Translation and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin
Version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitāb al-Manāẓir, 2 vols. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 91.
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. ISBN 978-0-87169-914-5. OCLC 47168716 .
Smith, A. Mark (2001). "Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation
and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's "De aspectibus", the Medieval Latin Version of
Ibn al-Haytham's "Kitāb al-Manāẓir": Volume One". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 91
(4): i–337. JSTOR 3657358 .
Smith, A. Mark (2001). "Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation
and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's "De aspectibus", the Medieval Latin Version of
Ibn al-Haytham's "Kitāb al-Manāẓir": Volume Two". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 91
(5): 339–819. JSTOR 3657357 .
Thurs, Daniel Patrick (2007). Science Talk: Changing Notions of Science in American Popular Culture.
ISBN 978-0-8135-4073-3.

External links
Science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Deﬁnitions from
Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia
Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from
Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from
Wikibooks
Travel guide from
Wikivoyage
Resources from
Wikiversity
Publications
"GCSE Science textbook". Wikibooks.org
Resources
Euroscience :
"ESOF: Euroscience Open Forum" . Archived from the original

on June 10, 2010.

Science Development in the Latin American docta
Classiﬁcation of the Sciences

in Dictionary of the History of Ideas. (Dictionary's new electronic

format is badly botched, entries after "Design" are inaccessible. Internet Archive old version ).
"Nature of Science"

University of California Museum of Paleontology

United States Science Initiative

Selected science information provided by US Government

agencies, including research & development results

How science works

University of California Museum of Paleontology

Last edited 17 hours ago by Cswquz

