Not to be confused with Self-concept, Self-consciousness, Self-perception, Self-image, or Sentience.
This article needs attention from an expert on the subject.
Learn more

The Painter and the Buyer (1565).
In this drawing by Pieter Brueghel the
Elder, the painter is thought to be a
self-portrait.

Self-awareness is the capacity for introspection and the ability to recognize oneself as an individual
separate from the environment and other individuals.[1] It is not to be confused with consciousness
in the sense of qualia. While consciousness is being aware of one's environment and body and
lifestyle, self-awareness is the recognition of that awareness.[2] Self-awareness is how an individual
consciously knows and understands their own character, feelings, motives, and desires. There are
two broad categories of self-awareness: internal self-awareness and external self-awareness.[3]

Neurobiological basis
Introduction
This microessay on Ramachandran, rather than the whole of the ﬁeld relies largely or entirely on a single source.
Learn more

There are questions regarding what part of the brain allows us to be self-aware and how we are
biologically programmed to be self-aware. V.S. Ramachandran has speculated that mirror neurons
may provide the neurological basis of human self-awareness.[4] In an essay written for the Edge
Foundation in 2009, Ramachandran gave the following explanation of his theory: "... I also
speculated that these neurons can not only help simulate other people's behavior but can be turned
'inward'—as it were—to create second-order representations or meta-representations of your own

earlier brain processes. This could be the neural basis of introspection, and of the reciprocity of self
awareness and other awareness. There is obviously a chicken-or-egg question here as to which
evolved ﬁrst, but... The main point is that the two co-evolved, mutually enriching each other to create
the mature representation of self that characterizes modern humans."[5]

Body
Bodily (self-)awareness

is related to proprioception and visualization

Health
In health and medicine, body-awareness is a construct that refers to a person’s overall ability to
direct their focus on various internal sensations accurately. Both proprioception and interoception
allow individuals to be consciously aware of various sensations.[6] Proprioception allows individuals
and patients to focus on sensations in their muscles and joints, posture, and balance, while
interoception is used to determine sensations of the internal organs, such as ﬂuctuating heartbeat,
respiration, lung pain, or satiety. Over-acute body-awareness, under-acute body-awareness, and
distorted body-awareness are symptoms present in a variety of health disorders and conditions,
such as obesity, anorexia nervosa, and chronic joint pain.[7] For example, a distorted perception of
satiety present in a patient suffering from anorexia nervosa
Human development
Bodily self-awareness in human development refers to one’s awareness of their body as a physical
object, with physical properties, that can interact with other objects.Tests have shown that at the
age of only a few months old, toddlers are already aware of the relationship between the
proprioceptive and visual information they receive.[8] This is called ﬁrst-person self-awareness.
At around 18 months old and later, children begin to develop reﬂective self-awareness, which is the
next stage of bodily awareness and involves children recognizing themselves in reﬂections, mirrors,
and pictures.[9] Children who have not obtained this stage of bodily self-awareness yet will tend to
view reﬂections of themselves as other children and respond accordingly, as if they were looking at
someone else face to face. In contrast, those who have reached this level of awareness will
recognize that they see themselves, for instance seeing dirt on their face in the reﬂection and then
touching their own face to wipe it off.

Slightly after toddlers become reﬂectively self-aware, they begin to develop the ability to recognize
their bodies as physical objects in time and space that interact and impact other objects. For
instance, a toddler placed on a blanket, when asked to hand someone the blanket, will recognize
that they need to get off it to be able to lift it.[8] This is the ﬁnal stage of body self-awareness and is
called objective self-awareness.

Animals
See also: Animal consciousness and Mirror test

Studies have been done mainly on primates to test if self-awareness is present. Apes, monkeys,
elephants, and dolphins have been studied most frequently. The most relevant studies to this day
that represent self-awareness in animals have been done on chimpanzees, dolphins, and magpies.
Self-awareness in animals is tested through mirror self recognition. Animals that show mirror self
recognition go through four stages 1) social response, 2) physical mirror inspection, 3) repetitive
mirror testing behavior, and 4) the mark test; which involves the animals spontaneously touching a
mark on their body which would have been diﬃcult to see without the mirror.[10]

The mirror test is a simple measure of
self-awareness.

David DeGrazia states that there are three types of self-awareness in animals; the ﬁrst being, bodily
self-awareness. This sense of awareness allows animals to understand that they are different from
the rest of the environment; it is also the reason why animals do not eat themselves. Bodilyawareness also includes proprioception and sensation. The second type of self-awareness in
animals is, social self-awareness. This type of awareness is seen in highly social animals and is the
awareness that they have a role within themselves in order to survive. This type of awareness
allows animals to interact with each other. The ﬁnal type of self-awareness is introspective
awareness. This awareness is responsible for animals to understand feelings, desires, and
beliefs.[11]

The Red Spot Technique created and experimented by Gordon Gallup[12] studies self-awareness in
animals (primates). In this technique, a red odorless spot is placed on an anesthetized primate's
forehead. The spot is placed on the forehead so that it can only be seen through a mirror. Once the
individual awakens, independent movements toward the spot after seeing their reﬂection in a mirror
are observed. During the Red Spot Technique, after looking in the mirror, chimpanzees used their
ﬁngers to touch the red dot that was on their forehead and, after touching the red dot they would
even smell their ﬁngertips.[13] "Animals that can recognize themselves in mirrors can conceive of
themselves," says Gallup. Another prime example are elephants. Three elephants were exposed to
large mirrors where experimenters studied the reaction when the elephants saw their reﬂection.
These elephants were given the "litmus mark test" in order to see whether they were aware of what
they were looking at. This visible mark was applied on the elephants and the researchers reported a
large progress with self-awareness. The elephants shared this success rate with other animals such
as monkeys and dolphins.[14]
Chimpanzees and other apes – species which have been studied extensively – compare the most
to humans with the most convincing ﬁndings and straightforward evidence in the relativity of selfawareness in animals so far.[15] Dolphins were put to a similar test and achieved the same results.
Diana Reiss, a psycho-biologist at the New York Aquarium discovered that bottlenose dolphins can
recognize themselves in mirrors.[16]
Researchers also used the mark test or mirror test [17] to study the magpie's self-awareness. As a
majority of birds are blind below the beak, Prior and colleagues[15] marked the birds’ neck with three
different colors: red, yellow and a black imitation, as magpies are originally black. When placed in
front of a mirror, the birds with the red and yellow spots began scratching at their necks, signaling
the understanding of something different being on their bodies. During one trial with a mirror and a
mark, three out of the ﬁve magpies showed a minimum of one example of self-directed behavior.
The magpies explored the mirror by moving toward it and looking behind it. One of the magpies,
Harvey, during several trials would pick up objects, pose, do some wing-ﬂapping, all in front of the
mirror with the objects in his beak. This represents a sense of self-awareness; knowing what is
going on within himself and in the present. The authors suggest that self-recognition in birds and
mammals may be a case of convergent evolution, where similar evolutionary pressures result in
similar behaviors or traits, although they arrive at them via different routes.[18]
A few slight occurrences of behavior towards the magpie's own body happened in the trial with the
black mark and the mirror. It is assumed in this study[15] that the black mark may have been slightly
visible on the black feathers. Prior and Colleagues,[15] stated "This is an indirect support for the
interpretation that the behavior towards the mark region was elicited by seeing the own body in the
mirror in conjunction with an unusual spot on the body."

The behaviors of the magpies clearly contrasted with no mirror present. In the no-mirror trials, a
non-reﬂective gray plate of the same size and in the same position as the mirror was swapped in.
There were not any mark directed self-behaviors when the mark was present, in color, or in black.[15]
Prior and Colleagues'[15] data quantitatively matches the ﬁndings in chimpanzees. In summary of
the mark test,[15] the results show that magpies understand that a mirror image represents their
own body; magpies show to have self-awareness.
Among ants, 23 of 24 adult ants, from three species, scratched at small blue dots painted on their
fronts when they were able to see the dot in a mirror. None of the ants scratched their fronts when
they had no mirror to see the dot. None tried to scratch the blue dot on the mirror. When they had a
mirror and a brown dot similar to their own color, only one of thirty ants scratched the brown dot;
researchers said she was darker than average so the dot was visible. They also reacted to the mirror
itself. Even without dots, 30 out of 30 ants touched the mirror with legs, antennae and mouths, while
0 of 30 ants touched a clear glass divider, with ants on the other side.[19]
A more recent study introduces a different approach to examining self-awareness in animals,
suggesting a new ethological approach which may shed light on different ways of testing for
cognition, and helps advance the debate among ethologists (and philosophers) on consciousness.
The research by Gatti Cazzolla published in 2016, with the title adapted from the novel by Lewis
Carroll “Self-consciousness: beyond the looking-glass and what dogs found there“,[20] could change
the way some experiments on animal behaviour are validated.
The study shows that the “sniff test of self-recognition (STSR)[21]”, as deﬁned in the study, even
when applied to multiple individuals living in groups with different ages and sexes, provides
meaningful evidence of self-awareness in dogs. As such, these results may show that this capacity
is not a feature speciﬁc only to great apes, humans and a few other animals, but instead that
observing self-recognition in animals depends on the method researchers use to verify it.
Attempts to verify this idea have been made before, but most of them were only observational,
lacked empirical evidences or had been carried out only with a single individual and not repeated
systematically with other dogs of different sex and age (for example the ethologist Marc Bekoff in
2001 used a "yellow snow test[22]" to measure how long his dog was sniﬃng his scent of urine and
those of the other dogs in the area). Therefore, the ﬁnal test of self-recognition in a species
phylogenetically distant from apes (thus with different sensory modalities and communication
behaviour) as the dog, was not obtained.
The innovative approach to test the self-awareness with a smell test "highlights the need to shift the
paradigm of the anthropocentric idea of consciousness to a species-speciﬁc perspective[23]"—said
Roberto Cazzolla Gatti: "We would never expect that a mole or a bat can recognize theirselves in a

mirror, but now we have strong empirical evidences to suggest that if species other than primates
are tested on chemical or auditory perception base we could get really unexpected results”.[23]

Cooperation and evolutionary problems
An organism can be effectively altruistic without being self-aware, aware of any distinction between
egoism and altruism, or aware of qualia in others. This by simple reactions to speciﬁc situations
which happens to beneﬁt other individuals in the organism's natural environment. If self-awareness
led to a necessity of an emotional empathy mechanism for altruism and egoism being default in its
absence, that would have precluded evolution from a state without self-awareness to a self-aware
state in all social animals. The ability of the theory of evolution to explain self-awareness can be
rescued by abandoning the hypothesis of self-awareness being a basis for cruelty.[24][25]

Psychology
Self-awareness has been called "arguably the most fundamental issue in psychology, from both a
developmental and an evolutionary perspective."[26]
Self-awareness theory, developed by Duval and Wicklund in their 1972 landmark book A theory of
objective self awareness, states that when we focus our attention on ourselves, we evaluate and
compare our current behavior to our internal standards and values. This elicits a state of objective
self-awareness. We become self-conscious as objective evaluators of ourselves.[27] However selfawareness is not to be confused with self-consciousness.[28] Various emotional states are
intensiﬁed by self-awareness. However, some people may seek to increase their self-awareness
through these outlets. People are more likely to align their behavior with their standards when made
self-aware. People will be negatively affected if they don't live up to their personal standards.
Various environmental cues and situations induce awareness of the self, such as mirrors, an
audience, or being videotaped or recorded. These cues also increase accuracy of personal
memory.[29] In one of Demetriou's neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development, self-awareness
develops systematically from birth through the life span and it is a major factor for the development
of general inferential processes.[30] Moreover, a series of recent studies showed that self-awareness
about cognitive processes participates in general intelligence on a par with processing eﬃciency
functions, such as working memory, processing speed, and reasoning.[31] Albert Bandura's theory of
self-eﬃcacy builds on our varying degrees of self-awareness. It is "the belief in one's capabilities to
organize and execute the courses of action required to manage prospective situations." A person's
belief in their ability to succeed sets the stage to how they think, behave and feel. Someone with a
strong self-eﬃcacy, for example, views challenges as mere tasks that must be overcome, and are

not easily discouraged by setbacks. They are aware of their ﬂaws and abilities and choose to utilize
these qualities to the best of their ability. Someone with a weak sense of self-eﬃcacy evades
challenges and quickly feels discouraged by setbacks. They may not be aware of these negative
reactions, and therefore do not always change their attitude. This concept is central to Bandura's
social cognitive theory, "which emphasizes the role of observational learning, social experience, and
reciprocal determinism in the development of personality."[32]

Developmental stages
Individuals become conscious of themselves through the development of self-awareness.[26] This
particular type of self-development pertains to becoming conscious of one's own body and mental
state of mind including thoughts, actions, ideas, feelings and interactions with others.[33] "Selfawareness does not occur suddenly through one particular behavior: it develops gradually through a
succession of different behaviors all of which relate to the self."[34] The monitoring of one's mental
states is called metacognition and it is considered to be an indicator that there is some concept of
the self.[35] It is developed through an early sense of non-self components using sensory and
memory sources. In developing self–awareness through self-exploration and social experiences
one can broaden his social world and become more familiar with the self.
According to Emory University's Philippe Rochat, there are ﬁve levels of self-awareness which unfold
in early development and six potential prospects ranging from "Level 0" (having no self-awareness)
advancing complexity to "Level 5" (explicit self-awareness).[26]
Level 0: Confusion. At this level the individual has a degree of zero self-awareness. This person is
unaware of any mirror reﬂection or the mirror itself. They perceive the mirror as an extension of
their environment. Level 0 can also be displayed when an adult frightens himself in a mirror
mistaking his own reﬂection as another person just for a second.
Level 1: Differentiation. The individual realizes the mirror is able to reﬂect things. They see that
what is in the mirror is different from what is surrounding them. At this level they can differentiate
between their own movement in the mirror and the movement of the surrounding environment.
Level 2: Situation. At this point an individual can link the movements on the mirror to what is
perceived within their own body. This is the ﬁrst hint of self-exploration on a projected surface
where what is visualized on the mirror is special to the self.
Level 3: Identiﬁcation. This stage is characterized by the new ability to identify self: an individual
can now see that what's in the mirror is not another person but actually them. It is seen when a
child, instead of referring to the mirror while referring to themselves, refers to themselves while
looking in the mirror.

Level 4: Permanence. Once an individual reaches this level they can identify the self beyond the
present mirror imagery. They are able to identify the self in previous pictures looking different or
younger. A "permanent self" is now experienced.
Level 5: Self-consciousness or "meta" self-awareness. At this level not only is the self seen from a
ﬁrst person view but its realized that it's also seen from a third person's view. They begin to
understand they can be in the mind of others. For instance, how they are seen from a public
standpoint.[26]

Infancy and early childhood
It is to be kept in mind that as an infant comes into this world, they have no concept of what is
around them, nor for the signiﬁcance of others around them. It is throughout the ﬁrst year that they
gradually begin to acknowledge that their body is actually separate from that of their mother, and
that they are an "active, causal agent in space". By the end of the ﬁrst year, they additionally realize
that their movement, as well, is separate from movement of the mother. That is a huge advance, yet
they are still quite limited and cannot yet know what they look like, "in the sense that the infant
cannot recognize its own face".[36] By the time an average toddler reaches 18–24 months, they will
discover themselves and recognize their own reﬂection in the mirror[37], however in many African
populations this is not the case until the age of six[38]. They begin to acknowledge the fact that the
image in front of them, who happens to be them, moves; indicating that they appreciate and can
consider the relationship between cause and effect that is happening.[36] By the age of 24 months
the toddler will observe and relate their own actions to those actions of other people and the
surrounding environment.[37] Once an infant has gotten a lot of experience, and time, in front of a
mirror, it is only then that they are able to recognize themselves in the reﬂection, and understand
that it is them. For example, in a study, an experimenter took a red marker and put a fairly large red
dot (so it is visible by the infant) on the infant's nose, and placed them in front of a mirror. Prior to
15 months of age, the infant will not react to this, but after 15 months of age, they will either touch
their nose, wondering what it is they have on their face, or point to it. This indicates the appearance
that they recognize that the image they see in the reﬂection of the mirror

is themselves. There is

somewhat of the same thing called the mirror-self recognition task, and it has been used as a
research tool for numerous years, and has given, and lead to, key foundations of the infant's
sense/awareness of self.[39] For example, "for Piaget, the objectiﬁcation of the bodily self occurs as
the infant becomes able to represent the body's spatial and causal relationship with the external
world (Piaget, 1954).[40] Facial recognition places a big pivotal point in their development of selfawareness.[36] By 18 months, the infant can communicate their name to others, and upon being
shown a picture they are in, they can identify themselves. By two years old, they also usually acquire
gender category and age categories, saying things such as "I am a girl, not a boy" and "I am a baby

or child, not a grownup". Evidently, it is not at the level of an adult or an adolescent, but as an infant
moves to middle childhood and onwards to adolescence, they develop a higher level of selfawareness and self-description.[36]
As infants develop their senses, using multiple senses of in order to recognize what is around them,
infants can become affected by something known as "facial multi stimulation". In one experiment by
Filippetti, Farroni, and Johnson, an infant of around ﬁve months in age is given what is known as an
“enfacement illusion”.[41] “Infants watched a side-by-side video display of a peer’s face being
systematically stroked on the cheek with a paintbrush. During the video presentation, the infant’s
own cheek was stroked in synchrony with one video and in asynchrony with the other”.[41] Infants
were proven to recognize and project an image of a peer with that of their own, showing beginning
signs of facial recognition cues onto one’s self, with the assistance of an illusion.

Piaget
Around school age a child's awareness of personal memory transitions into a sense of one's own
self. At this stage, a child begins to develop interests along with likes and dislikes. This transition
enables the awareness of an individual's past, present, and future to grow as conscious experiences
are remembered more often.[37] As a preschooler, they begin to give much more speciﬁc details
about things, instead of generalizing. For example, the infant will talk about the Los Angeles Lakers
basketball team, and the New York Rangers hockey team, instead of the infant just stating that he
likes sports. Furthermore, they will start to express certain preferences (e.g., Tod likes mac and
cheese) and will start to identify certain possessions of theirs (e.g., Lara has a bird as a pet at
home). At this age, the infant is in the stage Piaget names the pre operational stage of development.
The infant is very inaccurate at judging themselves because they do not have much to go about. For
example, an infant at this stage will not associate that they are strong with their ability to cross the
jungle gym at their school, nor will they associate the fact that they can solve a math problem with
their ability to count.[36]

Adolescence
One becomes conscious of their emotions during adolescence. Most children are aware of
emotions such as shame, guilt, pride and embarrassment by the age of two, but do not fully
understand how those emotions affect their life.[42] By age 13, children become more in touch with
these emotions and begin to apply them to their own lives. A study entitled "The Construction of the
Self" found that many adolescents display happiness and self-conﬁdence around friends, but
hopelessness and anger around parents due to the fear of being a disappointment. Teenagers were

also shown to feel intelligent and creative around teachers, and shy, uncomfortable and nervous
around people they were not familiar with.[43]
In adolescent development, the deﬁnition self-awareness also has a more complex emotional
context due to the maturity of adolescents compared to those in the early childhood phase, and
these elements can include but are not limited to self-image, self-concept, and self–consciousness
along many other traits that can relate to Rochat's ﬁnal level of self awareness, however it is still a
distinct concept within its own previous deﬁnition.[44] Social interactions mainly separate the
element of self-awareness in adolescent rather than in childhood, as well as further developed
emotional recognition skills in adolescents. Sandu, Pânișoară, and Pânișoară demonstrate these in
their work with teenagers and demonstrates that there is a mature sense of self-awareness with
students who were aged 17, which in term provides a clear structure with how elements like selfconcept, self-image, and self-consciousness relate to self-awareness.[44]

Mental health
As children reach their adolescent stages of life, the acute sense of emotion has widened into a
meta cognitive state in which mental health issues can become more prevalent due to their
heightened emotional and social development.[45] There are elements of contextual behavioral
science such as Self-as-Content, Self-as-Process and Self-as-Context, involved with adolescent selfawareness that can associate with mental health.[45] Moran, Almada, and McHugh presented the
idea that these domains of self are associated with adolescent mental health in various
capacities.[45] Anger management is also a domain of mental health that is associated with the
concept of self-awareness in teens.[46] Self-awareness training has been linked to lowering anger
management issues and reducing aggressive tendencies in adolescents “Persons having suﬃcient
self-awareness promote relaxation and awareness about themselves and when going angry, at the
ﬁrst step they become aware of anger in their inside and accept it, then try to handle it”.[46]

Philosophy
This section needs expansion.
Learn more

Locke
An early philosophical discussion of self-awareness is that of John Locke. Locke was apparently
inﬂuenced by René Descartes' statement normally translated 'I think, therefore I am' (Cogito ergo
sum). In chapter XXVII "On Identity and Diversity" of Locke's An Essay Concerning Human

Understanding (1689) he conceptualized consciousness as the repeated self-identiﬁcation of
oneself through which moral responsibility could be attributed to the subject—and therefore
punishment and guiltiness justiﬁed, as critics such as Nietzsche would point out, aﬃrming "...the
psychology of conscience is not 'the voice of God in man'; it is the instinct of cruelty ... expressed,
for the ﬁrst time, as one of the oldest and most indispensable elements in the foundation of
culture."[47][48][49] John Locke does not use the terms self-awareness or self-consciousness
though.[50]
According to Locke, personal identity (the self) "depends on consciousness, not on substance".[51]
We are the same person to the extent that we are conscious of our past and future thoughts and
actions in the same way as we are conscious of our present thoughts and actions. If consciousness
is this "thought" which doubles all thoughts, then personal identity is only founded on the repeated
act of consciousness: "This may show us wherein personal identity consists: not in the identity of
substance, but ... in the identity of consciousness."[51] For example, one may claim to be a
reincarnation of Plato, therefore having the same soul. However, one would be the same person as
Plato only if one had the same consciousness of Plato's thoughts and actions that he himself did.
Therefore, self-identity is not based on the soul. One soul may have various personalities.
Locke argues that self-identity is not founded either on the body or the substance, as the substance
may change while the person remains the same. "Animal identity is preserved in identity of life, and
not of substance", as the body of the animal grows and changes during its life.[51] describes a case
of a prince and a cobbler in which the soul of the prince is transferred to the body of the cobbler and
vice versa. The prince still views himself as a prince, though he no longer looks like one. This
border-case leads to the problematic thought that since personal identity is based on
consciousness, and that only oneself can be aware of his consciousness, exterior human judges
may never know if they really are judging—and punishing—the same person, or simply the same
body. Locke argues that one may be judged for the actions of one's body rather than one's soul, and
only God knows how to correctly judge a man's actions. Men also are only responsible for the acts
of which they are conscious. This forms the basis of the insanity defense which argues that one
cannot be held accountable for acts in which they were unconsciously irrational, or mentally ill[52]—
In reference to man's personality, Locke claims that "whatever past actions it cannot reconcile or
appropriate to that present self by consciousness, it can be no more concerned in it than if they had
never been done: and to receive pleasure or pain, i.e. reward or punishment, on the account of any
such action, is all one as to be made happy or miserable in its ﬁrst being, without any demerit at
all."[53]

Disorders

The medical term for not being aware of one's deﬁcits is anosognosia, or more commonly known as
a lack of insight. Having a lack of awareness raises the risks of treatment and service
nonadherence.[54] Individuals who deny having an illness may be against seeking professional help
because they are convinced that nothing is wrong with them. Disorders of self-awareness frequently
follow frontal lobe damage.[55] There are two common methods used to measure how severe an
individual's lack of self-awareness is. The Patient Competency Rating Scale (PCRS) evaluates selfawareness in patients who have endured a traumatic brain injury.[56] PCRS is a 30-item self-report
instrument which asks the subject to use a 5-point Likert scale to rate his or her degree of diﬃculty
in a variety of tasks and functions. Independently, relatives or signiﬁcant others who know the
patient well are also asked to rate the patient on each of the same behavioral items. The difference
between the relatives’ and patient's perceptions is considered an indirect measure of impaired selfawareness. The limitations of this experiment rest on the answers of the relatives. Results of their
answers can lead to a bias. This limitation prompted a second method of testing a patient's selfawareness. Simply asking a patient why they are in the hospital or what is wrong with their body can
give compelling answers as to what they see and are analyzing.[57]

Anosognosia
Anosognosia was a term coined by Joseph Babinski to describe the clinical condition in which an
individual suffered from left hemiplegia following a right cerebral hemisphere stroke yet denied that
there were any problems with their left arm or leg. This condition is known as anosognosia for
hemiplegia (AHP). This condition has evolved throughout the years and is now used to describe
people who lack subjective experience in both neurological and neuropsychological cases.[58] A
wide variety of disorders are associated with anosognosia. For example, patients who are blind
from cortical lesions might in fact be unaware that they are blind and may state that they do not
suffer from any visual disturbances. Individuals with aphasia and other cognitive disorders may also
suffer from anosognosia as they are unaware of their deﬁciencies and when they make certain
speech errors, they may not correct themselves due to their unawareness.[59] Individuals who suffer
from Alzheimer's disease lack awareness; this deﬁciency becomes more intense throughout their
disease.[60] A key issue with this disorder is that people who do have anosognosia and suffer from
certain illnesses may not be aware of them, which ultimately leads them to put themselves in
dangerous positions and/or environments.[59] To this day there are still no available treatments for
AHP, but it has been documented that temporary remission has been used following vestibular
stimulation.[61]

Dissociative identity disorder

Main article: Dissociative identity disorder

Dissociative identity disorder or multiple personality disorder (MPD) is a disorder involving a
disturbance of identity in which two or more separate and distinct personality states (or identities)
control an individual's behavior at different times.[62] One identity may be different from another, and
when an individual with DID is under the inﬂuence of one of their identities, they may forget their
experiences when they switch to the other identity. "When under the control of one identity, a person
is usually unable to remember some of the events that occurred while other personalities were in
control."[63] They may experience time loss, amnesia, and adopt different mannerisms, attitudes,
speech and ideas under different personalities. They are often unaware of the different lives they
lead or their condition in general, feeling as though they are looking at their life through the lens of
someone else, and even being unable to recognize themselves in a mirror.[64] Two cases of DID have
brought awareness to the disorder, the ﬁrst case being that of Eve. This patient harbored three
different personalities: Eve White the good wife and mother, Eve Black the party girl, and Jane the
intellectual. Under stress, her episodes would worsen. She even tried to strangle her own daughter
and had no recollection of the act afterward. Eve went through years of therapy before she was able
to learn how to control her alters and be mindful of her disorder and episodes. Her condition, being
so rare at the time, inspired the book and ﬁlm adaptation The Three Faces of Eve, as well as a
memoir by Eve herself entitled I'm Eve. Doctors speculated that growing up during the Depression
and witnessing horriﬁc things being done to other people could have triggered emotional distress,
periodic amnesia, and eventually DID.[65] In the second case, Shirley Mason, or Sybil, was described
as having over 16 separate personalities with different characteristics and talents. Her accounts of
horriﬁc and sadistic abuse by her mother during childhood prompted doctors to believe that this
trauma caused her personalities to split, furthering the unproven idea that this disorder was rooted
in child abuse, while also making the disorder famous. In 1998 however, Sybil's case was exposed
as a sham. Her therapist would encourage Sybil to act as her other alter ego although she felt
perfectly like herself. Her condition was exaggerated in order to seal book deals and television
adaptations.[66] Awareness of this disorder began to crumble shortly after this ﬁnding. To this day,
no proven cause of DID has been found, but treatments such as psychotherapy, medications,
hypnotherapy, and adjunctive therapies have proven to be very effective.[67]

Autism spectrum disorder
Main article: Autism spectrum

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a range of neurodevelopmental disabilities that can adversely
impact social communication and create behavioral challenges (Understanding Autism, 2003).[68]
"Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and autism are both general terms for a group of complex

disorders of brain development. These disorders are characterized, in varying degrees, by diﬃculties
in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication and repetitive behaviors."[69] ASDs can
also cause imaginative abnormalities and can range from mild to severe, especially in sensorymotor, perceptual and affective dimensions.[70] Children with ASD may struggle with self-awareness
and self acceptance. Their different thinking patterns and brain processing functions in the area of
social thinking and actions may compromise their ability to understand themselves and social
connections to others.[71] About 75% diagnosed autistics are mentally handicapped in some general
way and the other 25% diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome show average to good cognitive
functioning.[72] When we compare our own behavior to the morals and values that we were taught,
we can focus more attention on ourselves which increases self-awareness. To understand the many
effects of autism spectrum disorders on those aﬄicted have led many scientists to theorize what
level of self-awareness occurs and in what degree. Research found that ASD can be associated with
intellectual disability and diﬃculties in motor coordination and attention. It can also result in
physical health issues as well, such as sleep and gastrointestinal disturbances. As a result of all
those problems, individuals are literally unaware of themselves.[73] It is well known that children
suffering from varying degrees of autism struggle in social situations. Scientists at the University of
Cambridge have produced evidence that self-awareness is a main problem for people with ASD.
Researchers used functional magnetic resonance scans (FMRI) to measure brain activity in
volunteers being asked to make judgments about their own thoughts, opinions, preferences, as well
as about someone else's. One area of the brain closely examined was the ventromedial pre-frontal
cortex (vMPFC) which is known to be active when people think about themselves.[74]

Major brain structures implicated in
autism.

A study out of Stanford University has tried to map out brain circuits with understanding selfawareness in Autism Spectrum Disorders.[75] This study suggests that self-awareness is primarily
lacking in social situations but when in private they are more self-aware and present. It is in the
company of others while engaging in interpersonal interaction that the self-awareness mechanism
seems to fail. Higher functioning individuals on the ASD scale have reported that they are more selfaware when alone unless they are in sensory overload or immediately following social exposure.[76]
Self-awareness dissipates when an autistic is faced with a demanding social situation. This theory
suggests that this happens due to the behavioral inhibitory system which is responsible for selfpreservation. This is the system that prevents human from self-harm like jumping out of a speeding
bus or putting our hand on a hot stove. Once a dangerous situation is perceived then the behavioral
inhibitory system kicks in and restrains our activities. "For individuals with ASD, this inhibitory
mechanism is so powerful, it operates on the least possible trigger and shows an over sensitivity to
impending danger and possible threats.[76] Some of these dangers may be perceived as being in the
presence of strangers, or a loud noise from a radio. In these situations self-awareness can be
compromised due to the desire of self preservation, which trumps social composure and proper
interaction.
The Hobson hypothesis reports that autism begins in infancy due to the lack of cognitive and
linguistic engagement which in turn results in impaired reﬂective self-awareness. In this study ten
children with Asperger's Syndrome were examined using the Self-understanding Interview. This
interview was created by Damon and Hart and focuses on seven core areas or schemas that
measure the capacity to think in increasingly diﬃcult levels. This interview will estimate the level of
self understanding present. "The study showed that the Asperger group demonstrated impairment
in the 'self-as-object' and 'self-as-subject' domains of the Self-understanding Interview, which
supported Hobson's concept of an impaired capacity for self-awareness and self-reﬂection in
people with ASD.".[77] Self-understanding is a self description in an individual's past, present and
future. Without self-understanding it is reported that self-awareness is lacking in people with ASD.
Joint attention (JA) was developed as a teaching strategy to help increase positive self-awareness
in those with autism spectrum disorder.[78] JA strategies were ﬁrst used to directly teach about
reﬂected mirror images and how they relate to their reﬂected image. Mirror Self Awareness
Development (MSAD) activities were used as a four-step framework to measure increases in selfawareness in those with ASD. Self-awareness and knowledge is not something that can simply be
taught through direct instruction. Instead, students acquire this knowledge by interacting with their
environment.[78] Mirror understanding and its relation to the development of self leads to
measurable increases in self-awareness in those with ASD. It also proves to be a highly engaging
and highly preferred tool in understanding the developmental stages of self- awareness.

There have been many different theories and studies done on what degree of self-awareness is
displayed among people with autism spectrum disorder. Scientists have done research about the
various parts of the brain associated with understanding self and self-awareness. Studies have
shown evidence of areas of the brain that are impacted by ASD. Other theories suggest that helping
an individual learn more about themselves through Joint Activities, such as the Mirror Self
Awareness Development may help teach positive self-awareness and growth. In helping to build
self-awareness it is also possible to build self-esteem and self acceptance. This in turn can help to
allow the individual with ASD to relate better to their environment and have better social interactions
with others.

Schizophrenia
Main article: Schizophrenia

Artistic view of how the world feels
with schizophrenia.

Schizophrenia is a chronic psychiatric illness characterized by excessive dopamine activity in the
mesolimbic tract and insuﬃcient dopamine activity in the mesocortical tract leading to symptoms
of psychosis along with poor cognition in socialization. Under the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, people with schizophrenia have a combination of positive, negative and
psychomotor symptoms. These cognitive disturbances involve rare beliefs and/or thoughts of a
distorted reality that creates an abnormal pattern of functioning for the patient. The cause of
schizophrenia has a substantial genetic component involving many genes. While the heritability of
schizophrenia has been found to be around 80%, only about 60% of sufferers report a positive
family history of the disorder, and ultimately the cause is thought to be a combination of genetic
and environmental factors.[79] It is believed that the experience of stressful life events is an
environmental factor that can trigger the onset of schizophrenia in individuals who already are at
risk from genetics and age.[80] The level of self-awareness among patients with schizophrenia is a
heavily studied topic.

Schizophrenia as a disease state is characterized by severe cognitive dysfunction and it is uncertain
to what extent patients are aware of this deﬁciency. Medalia and Lim (2004),[81] investigated
patients’ awareness of their cognitive deﬁcit in the areas of attention, nonverbal memory, and verbal
memory. Results from this study (N=185) revealed large discrepancy in patients’ assessment of
their cognitive functioning relative to the assessment of their clinicians. Though it is impossible to
access ones’ consciousness and truly understand what a schizophrenic believes, regardless in this
study, patients were not aware of their cognitive dysfunctional reasoning. In the DSM-5, to receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia, they must have two or more of the following symptoms in the duration
of one month: delusions*, hallucinations*, disorganized speech*, grossly disorganized/catatonic
behavior and negative symptoms (*these three symptoms above all other symptoms must be
present to correctly diagnose a patient.) Sometimes these symptoms are very prominent and are
treated with a combination of antipsychotics (i.e. haloperidol, loxapine), atypical antipsychotics
(such as clozapine and risperdone) and psychosocial therapies that include family interventions and
socials skills. When a patient is undergoing treatment and recovering from the disorder, the memory
of their behavior is present in a diminutive amount; thus, self-awareness of diagnoses of
schizophrenia after treatment is rare, as well as subsequent to onset and prevalence in the patient.
The above ﬁndings are further supported by a study conducted by Amador and colleagues.[82] The
study suggests a correlation exists between patient insight, compliance and disease progression.
Investigators assess insight of illness was assessed via Scale to Assess Unawareness of Mental
Disorder and was used along with rating of psychopathology, course of illness, and compliance with
treatments in a sample of 43 patients. Patients with poor insight are less likely to be compliant with
treatment and are more likely to have a poorer prognosis. Patients with hallucinations sometimes
experience positive symptoms, which can include delusions of reference, thought
insertion/withdrawal, thought broadcast, delusions of persecution, grandiosity and many more.
These psychoses skew the patient's perspectives of reality in ways in which they truly believe are
really happening. For instance, a patient that is experiencing delusions of reference may believe
while watching the weather forecast that when the weatherman says it will rain, he is really sending
a message to the patient in which rain symbolizes a speciﬁc warning completely irrelevant to what
the weather is. Another example would be thought broadcast, which is when a patient believes that
everyone can hear their thoughts. These positive symptoms sometimes are so severe to where the
schizophrenic believes that something is crawling on them or smelling something that is not there
in reality. These strong hallucinations are intense and diﬃcult to convince the patient that they do
not exist outside of their cognitive beliefs, making it extremely diﬃcult for a patient to understand
and become self-aware that what they are experiencing is in fact not there.
Furthermore, a study by Bedford and Davis[83] (2013) was conducted to look at the association of
denial vs. acceptance of multiple facets of schizophrenia (self reﬂection, self perception and

insight) and its effect on self-reﬂection (N=26). Study results suggest patients with increased
disease denial have lower recollection for self evaluated mental illnesses. To a great extent, disease
denial creates a hardship for patients to undergo recovery because their feelings and sensations are
intensely outstanding. But just as this and the above studies imply, a large proportion of
schizophrenics do not have self-awareness of their illness for many factors and severity of
reasoning of their diagnoses.

Bipolar disorder
Main article: Bipolar disorder

Bipolar disorder is an illness that causes shifts in mood, energy, and ability to function. Selfawareness is crucial in those suffering from this disease, as they must be able to distinguish
between feeling a certain way because of the disorder or because of separate issues. "Personality,
behavior, and dysfunction affect your bipolar disorder, so you must 'know' yourself in order to make
the distinction."[84] This disorder is a diﬃcult one to diagnose, as self-awareness changes with
mood. "For instance, what might appear to you as conﬁdence and clever ideas for a new business
venture might be a pattern of grandiose thinking and manic behavior".[85] Issues occur between
understanding irrationality in a mood swing and being completely wrapped in a manic episode,
rationalizing that the exhibited behaviors are normal.
It is important to be able to distinguish what are symptoms of bipolar disorder and what is not. A
study done by Mathew et al. was done with the aim of "examining the perceptions of illness in self
and among other patients with bipolar disorder in remission".[86]
The study took place at the Department of Psychiatry, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India,
which is a centre that specializes in the "management of patients with mental and behavioural
disorders".[86] Eighty two patients (thirty two female and ﬁfty male) agreed to partake in the study.
These patients met the "International Classiﬁcation of Diseases – 10 diagnostic criteria for a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder I or II and were in remission"[86] and were put through a variety of
baseline assessments before beginning the study. These baseline assessments included using a
vignette, which was then used as an assessment tool during their follow-up. Patients were then
randomly divided into two groups, one who would be following a "structured educational
intervention programme" [86](experimental group), while the other would be following "usual care"
(control group).
The study was based on an interview in which patients were asked an array of open-eded questions
regarding topics such as "perceived causes, consequences, severity and its effects on body,
emotion, social network and home life, and on work, severity, possible course of action, help-

seeking behaviour and the role of the doctor/healer".[86] The McNemar test was then used to
compare the patients perspective of the illness versus their explanation of the illness. The results of
the study show that the beliefs that patients associated with their illness corresponds with the
possible causes of the disorder,[86] whereas "studies done among patients during periods of active
psychosis have recorded disagreement between their assessments of their own illness".[87] This
ties in to how diﬃcult self-awareness is within people who suffer from bipolar disorder.
Although this study was done on a population that were in remission from the disease, the
distinction between patients during "active psychosis" versus those in remission shows the
evolution of their self-awareness throughout their journey to recovery.

Plants
Self-discrimination in plants is found within their roots, tendrils and ﬂowers that avoid themselves
but not others in their environment.[88]

Self-incompatibility mechanism providing evidence for self-awareness in
plants
Self-awareness in plants is a fringe topic in the ﬁeld of self-awareness, and is researched
predominantly by botanists. The claim that plants are capable of perceiving self lies in the evidence
found that plants will not reproduce with themselves due to a gene selecting mechanism. In
addition, vining plants have been shown to avoid coiling around themselves, due to chemical
receptors in the plants' tendrils. Unique to plants, awareness of self means that the plant can
recognise self, whereas all other known conceptions of self-awareness is the ability to recognise
what is not self.

Recognition and rejection of self in plant reproduction
Research by June B. Nasrallah discovered that the plant's pollination mechanism also serves as a
mechanism against self-reproduction, which lays out the foundation of scientiﬁc evidence that
plants could be considered as self-aware organisms. The SI (Self-incompatibility) mechanism in
plants is unique in the sense that awareness of self derives from the capacity to recognise self,
rather than non-self. The SI mechanism function depends primarily on the interaction between
genes S-locus receptor protein kinase (SRK) and S-locus cysteine-rich protein gene (SCR). In cases
of self-pollination, SRK and SCR bind to activate SKR, Inhibiting pollen from fertilizing. In cases of
cross-pollination, SRK and SCR do not bind and therefor SRK is not activated, causing the pollen to

fertilise. In simple terms, the receptors either accept or reject the genes present in the pollen, and
when the genes are from the same plant, the SI mechanism described above creates a reaction to
prevent the pollen from fertilising.

Self-discrimination in the tendrils of the vine Cayratia japonica mediated by
physiological connection
The research by Yuya Fukano and Akira Yamawo provides a link between self-discrimination in
vining plants and amongst other classiﬁcations where the mechanism discovery has already been
established. It also contributes to the general foundation of evidence of self-discrimination
mechanisms in plants. The article makes the claim that the biological self-discrimination
mechanism that is present in both ﬂowering plants and ascidians, are also present in vining plants.
They tested this hypothesis by doing touch tests with self neighbouring and non-self neighbouring
pairs of plants. the test was performed by placing the sets of plants close enough for their tendrils
to interact with one-another. Evidence of self-discrimination in above-ground plants is demonstrated
in the results of the touch testing, which showed that in cases of connected self plants, severed self
plants and non-self plants, the rate of tendril activity and likeliness to coil was higher among
separated plants then those attached via rhizomes.

Theater
Main article: Theater

Theater also concerns itself with other awareness besides self-awareness. There is a possible
correlation between the experience of the theater audience and individual self-awareness. As actors
and audiences must not "break" the fourth wall in order to maintain context, so individuals must not
be aware of the artiﬁcial, or the constructed perception of his or her reality. This suggests that both
self-awareness and the social constructs applied to others are artiﬁcial continuums just as theater
is. Theatrical efforts such as Six Characters in Search of an Author, or The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,
construct yet another layer of the fourth wall, but they do not destroy the primary illusion. Refer to
Erving Goffman's Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience.

Science ﬁction
In science ﬁction, self-awareness describes an essential human property that often (depending on
the circumstances of the story) bestows personhood onto a non-human. If a computer, alien or
other object is described as "self-aware", the reader may assume that it will be treated as a

completely human character, with similar rights, capabilities and desires to a normal human
being.[89] The words "sentience", "sapience" and "consciousness" are used in similar ways in science
ﬁction.

See also
Animal consciousness
Bicameralism (psychology)
Boltzmann brain
Cartesian theater
Childhood amnesia
Conﬁdence
Deindividuation
Dunning–Kruger effect
Feldenkrais Method
Higher consciousness
Human self-reﬂection
Insight § Psychiatry
Lucid dreaming
Memory inhibition
Mindfulness
Mirror test
Modesty
Outline of self
Psychological mindedness
Self-consciousness
Self-knowledge (psychology)
Situation awareness
Vedanta

Vipassanā
Yoga nidra

References
1. "Self-awareness - Deﬁnition of Self-awareness by Merriam-Webster" .
2. Jabr, Ferris (2012). "Self-Awareness with a Simple Brain". Scientiﬁc American Mind. 23 (5): 28–
29. doi:10.1038/scientiﬁcamericanmind1112-28 .
3. "What Self-Awareness Really Is (and How to Cultivate It)" . Harvard Business Review. January
4, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2018.
4. Oberman, L.; Ramachandran, V.S. (2009). "Reﬂections on the Mirror Neuron System: Their
Evolutionary Functions Beyond Motor Representation". In Pineda, J.A. (ed.). Mirror Neuron
Systems: The Role of Mirroring Processes in Social Cognition. Humana Press. pp. 39–62.
ISBN 978-1-934115-34-3.
5. Ramachandran, V.S. (January 1, 2009). "Self Awareness: The Last Frontier, Edge Foundation
web essay" . Retrieved July 26, 2011.
6. Template:Cite pmc=2680990
7. Body Awareness in Anorexia Nervosa: Disturbances in "Body Image" and "Satiety"
8. Moore, Chris; Mealiea, Jennifer; Garon, Nancy; Povinelli, Daniel J. (March 1, 2007). "The
Development of Body Self-Awareness". Infancy. 11 (2): 157–174. doi:10.1111/j.15327078.2007.tb00220.x . ISSN 1532-7078 .
9. Brownell, Celia A.; Zerwas, Stephanie; Ramani, Geetha B. (September 1, 2007). " "So Big": The
Development of Body Self-Awareness in Toddlers" . Child Development. 78 (5): 1426–1440.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01075.x . ISSN 1467-8624 . PMC 3351035 .
PMID 17883440 .
10. Plotnik, Waal, Reiss, Joshua, Frans, Diana (2006). "Self recognition in an Asian elephant" .
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA. 103 (45): 17053–17057.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0608062103 . PMC 1636577 . PMID 17075063 .
11. "Self-awareness in animals"

(PDF).

12. Bekoff, M (2002). "Animal reﬂections". Nature. 419 (6904): 255. doi:10.1038/419255a .
PMID 12239547 .

13. Gallup Jr, G.G.; Anderson, J.R., & Shillito, D.J. (2002). "The mirror test. The cognitive animal:
Empirical and theoretical perspectives on animal cognition"
original

(PDF). Archived from the

(PDF) on October 6, 2014.

14. Plotnik et al., (2006)
15. Prior, H; Schwarz, A., Güntürkün, O (2008). "Mirror-Induced Behavior in the Magpie (Pica pica):
Evidence of Self-Recognition" . PLoS Biol. 6 (8): e202. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .
PMC 2517622 . PMID 18715117 .
16. Tennesen, M (2003). "Do Dolphins Have a Sense of Self?" . National Wildlife. World Edition.
17. Bard, Kim (2006). "Self-Awareness in Human and Chimpanzee Infants: What Is Measured and
What Is Meant by the Mark and Mirror Test?". Infancy. 9 (2): 191–219.
doi:10.1207/s15327078in0902_6 .
18. Alison, Motluk. "Mirror test shows magpies aren't so bird-brained" . Retrieved November 26,
2014.
19. Cammaerts, Marie-Claire, and Roger Cammaerts (July 1, 2015). "Are Ants (Hymenoptera
Formicide) Capable of Self Recognition?" . Journal of Science. 5 (7): 521–532.
20. Cazzolla Gatti, Roberto (April 2, 2016). "Self-consciousness: beyond the looking-glass and what
dogs found there". Ethology Ecology & Evolution. 28 (2): 232–240.
doi:10.1080/03949370.2015.1102777 . ISSN 0394-9370 .
21. Crew, Bec. "Dogs Show Signs of Self-Consciousness in New 'Sniff Test' " . ScienceAlert.
Retrieved December 5, 2016.
22. Bekoff, Marc (August 15, 2001). "Observations of scent-marking and discriminating self from
others by a domestic dog (Canis familiaris): tales of displaced yellow snow". Behavioural
Processes. 55 (2): 75–79. doi:10.1016/S0376-6357(01)00142-5 . PMID 11470499 .
23. "Dogs (and probably many other animals) have a conscience too!" . en.tsu.ru. Retrieved
December 5, 2016.
24. How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: A New View of Intelligence, Rolf Pfeifer, Josh
Bongard October 2006
25. The Unpredictable Species: What Makes Humans Unique, Lieberman, P 2013
26. Rochat, Philippe (2003). "Five levels of self-awareness as they unfold early in life"

(PDF).

Consciousness and Cognition. 12 (4): 717–731. doi:10.1016/s1053-8100(03)00081-3 .
27. Duval, Shelley and Wicklund, Robert A (1972) A theory of objective self awareness
Press.

Academic

28. Anthony P. Cohen, Self-Consciousness: An Alternative Anthropology of Identity, 1994. Google
Books link.
29. Thomas S. Duval Self-Awareness and Causal Attribution, p. 1, Springer, 2001 ISBN 978-0-79237501-2
30. Demetriou, A., & Kazi, S. (2001). Unity and modularity in the mind and the self: Studies on the
relationships between self-awareness, personality, and intellectual development from
childhood to adolescence. London: Routledge.
31. Demetriou, A.; Kazi, S. (2006). "Self-awareness in g (with processing eﬃciency and reasoning)".
Intelligence. 34 (3): 297–317. doi:10.1016/j.intell.2005.10.002 .
32. Cherry, Kendra. "What is Self-eﬃcacy?" . psychology.about.com.
33. Geangu, E. (2008). "Notes on Self-Awareness Development in Early Infancy"

(PDF). Gognitie,

Creier, Comportamente. 12 (1).
34. Bertenthal, B.; Fischer, K. W. (1978). "Development of Self-Recognition in the Infant"

(PDF).

Developmental Psychology. 14 (1): 44–50. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.550.1903 . doi:10.1037/00121649.14.1.44 .
35. Justin.J, Couchman (2014). "Humans and monkeys distinguish between self-generated,
opposing, and random actions" . Animal Cognition. 18 (1): 231–238. doi:10.1007/s10071-0140792-6 . PMC 4282946 . PMID 25108418 .
36. D. Yawkey, E. Johnson, Thomas, James (2013). Integrative Processes and Socialization: Early to
Middle Childhood. Psychology Press. pp. 45–49.
37. Rochat, Philippe (1998). "Self-Perception and Action in Infancy"

(PDF). Exp Brain Res. 123 (1–

2): 102–109. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.602.6987 . doi:10.1007/s002210050550 .
38. Lynn Broesch, Tanya (September 2010). "Cultural Variations in Children's Mirror SelfRecognition"

(PDF). Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology.

39. Moore, Maeliea, Garon, Chris, Jennifer, Nancy (2007). "The Development of Body SelfAwareness". 11. 11 (2): 157–174. doi:10.1111/j.1532-7078.2007.tb00220.x .
40. Moore, Maeliea, Garon, Chris, Jennifer, Nancy (2007). "The Development of Body SelfAwareness". Psychology Press. 11 (2): 157–174. doi:10.1111/j.1532-7078.2007.tb00220.x .
41. Filippetti, M.; Farroni, T.; Johnson, M.H. (2016). "Five-Month-old Infants' Discrimination of
Visual–Tactile Synchronous Facial Stimulation". Infant and Child Development – via EBSCO.
42. Zeanah, Charles (2009). Handbook of Infant Mental Health. New York: Guilford Press.

43. Harter, Susan (1999). The Construction of the Self. Guilford Press.
44. Sandu, Cristina Marina; Pânişoarã, Georgeta; Pânişoarã, Ion Ovidiu (May 5, 2015). "Study on the
Development of Self-awareness in Teenagers". Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences. 180:
1656–1660. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.05.060 . ISSN 1877-0428 .
45. Moran, Orla; Almada, Priscilla; McHugh, Louise (January 1, 2018). "An investigation into the
relationship between the three selves (Self-as-Content, Self-as-Process and Self-as-Context)
and mental health in adolescents". Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science. 7: 55–62.
doi:10.1016/j.jcbs.2018.01.002 . ISSN 2212-1447 .
46. Mohammadiarya, Alireza; Sarabi, Salar Dousti; Shirazi, Mahmoud; Lachinani, Fatemeh;
Roustaei, Amin; Abbasi, Zohre; Ghasemzadeh, Azizreza (January 1, 2012). "The Effect of
Training Self-Awareness and Anger Management on Aggression Level in Iranian Middle School
Students". Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences. 46: 987–991.
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.05.235 . ISSN 1877-0428 .
47. Ecce Homo by Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

p. 117

48. Richard Schacht Nietzsche, Genealogy, Morality, p. 244, University of California Press, 1994
ISBN 978-0-520-08318-9
49. What Nietzsche Taught

pp. 209–10.

50. Locke, John (1775). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding by John Locke . Retrieved
February 11, 2012.
51. Kendra, Cherry. "What Is Self-Awareness?" . Retrieved November 25, 2014.
52. Abraham S. Goldstein The Insanity Defense, p. 9, Yale University Press, 1967 ISBN 978-0-30000099-3
53. Kendra, Cherry. "What Is Self-Awareness?" . Retrieved November 26, 2014.
54. Xavier, Amador. "Anosognosia (Lack of Insight) Fact Sheet" . Retrieved November 26, 2014.
55. Prigatano, George P. "Disorders of Behavior and Self-Awareness" . thebarrow.org.
56. Leathem, Janet M.; Murphy, Latesha J.; Flett, Ross A. (August 9, 2010). "Self- and InformantRatings on the Patient Competency Rating Scale in Patients with Traumatic Brain Injury".
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology. 20 (5): 694–705.
doi:10.1076/jcen.20.5.694.1122 . PMID 10079045 .
57. George P, Prigatano, PhD. "Impaired Awareness, Finger Tapping, and Rehabilitation Outcome
After Brain Injury" . Retrieved November 26, 2014.

58. Prigatano, George P (December 1, 2009). "Anosognosia: clinical and ethical considerations".
Current Opinion in Neurology. 22 (6): 606–611. doi:10.1097/wco.0b013e328332a1e7 .
ISSN 1350-7540 . PMID 19809315 .
59. Heilman, K. M.; Barrett, A. M.; Adair, J. C. (November 29, 1998). "Possible mechanisms of
anosognosia: a defect in self–awareness" . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences. 353 (1377): 1903–1909. doi:10.1098/rstb.1998.0342 .
ISSN 0962-8436 . PMC 1692420 . PMID 9854262 .
60. Sack, M.; Cassidy, J. T.; Bole, G. G. (December 1975). "Prognostic factors in polyarteritis". The
Journal of Rheumatology. 2 (4): 411–420. ISSN 0315-162X . PMID 1533 .
61. Rubens, A. B. (July 1985). "Caloric stimulation and unilateral visual neglect". Neurology. 35 (7):
1019–1024. doi:10.1212/WNL.35.7.1019 . ISSN 0028-3878 . PMID 4010940 .
62. National alliance on mental illness. "Mental illnesses" . Retrieved November 27, 2014.
63. "Dissociative Disorders" . National Alliance on Mental Illness.
64. Dryden-Edwards, Roxanne. Conrad Stöppler, Melissa (ed.). "Dissociative Identity Disorder
Symptoms and Treatments" . MedicineNet. Retrieved October 16, 2017.
65. Ramsland, Katherine. "Multiple Personalities: Crime and Defense" . crimelibrary.com.
66. Ramsland, Katherine. "Multiple Personalities: Crime and Defense" . crimelibrary.com.
67. Dryden-Edwards, Roxanne. "Dissociative Identity Disorder" . medicinenet.com.
68. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. "Autism Fact Sheet" . Oﬃce of
Communications and Public Liaison. Retrieved November 27, 2014.
69. "Autistic disorder" .
70. "Recognizing Autism Spectrum Disorder" . autism.org.
71. Sarita, Freedman, PhD. "Self-Awareness and Self-Acceptance in School-Age Students with
ASD" . 2014 Autism Asperger's Digest. AADigest is a division of Future Horizons. Retrieved
November 27, 2014.
72. Victoria, McGeer (2004). "Autistic Self-Awareness". Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology. 11
(September, 2004): 235–251. doi:10.1353/ppp.2004.0066 .
73. Autism, Speaks. "What Is Autism? What is Autism Spectrum Disorder?" .
autismspeaks.org/what-autism. Retrieved November 26, 2014.
74. "How the autistic brain distinguishes oneself from others" . Science Daily. December 14,
2009.

75. Uddin, Lucina (October 29, 2008). "Neural Basis of Self and Other Representation in Autism: An
fMRI Study of Self-Face Recognition" . PLOS ONE. 3 (10): e3526.
Bibcode:2008PLoSO...3.3526U . doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003526 . PMC 2568959 .
PMID 18958161 .
76. Uddin, LQ (June 2011). "The self in autism: an emerging view from neuroimaging" .
Neurocase. 17 (3): 201–8. doi:10.1080/13554794.2010.509320 . PMC 3117464 .
PMID 21207316 .
77. Jackson, P; Skirrow, P; Hare DJ (May 2012). "Asperger through the looking glass: an
exploratory study of self-understanding in people with Asperger's syndrome". J Autism Dev
Disord. 42 (5): 697–706. doi:10.1007/s10803-011-1296-8 . PMID 21647793 .
78. "University of Pennsylvania" .
79. O'Donovan MC, Williams NM, Owen MJ (October 2003). "Recent advances in the genetics of
schizophrenia". Human Molecular Genetics. 12 Spec No 2: R125–33.
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddg302 . PMID 12952866 .
80. Day, R. (August 23, 2007). "Life events and schizophrenia: The "triggering" hypothesis". Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 64 (2): 97–122. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.1981.tb00765.x .
81. Medalia, Amelia (2004). "Self-awareness of cognitive functioning in schizophrenia".
Schizophrenia Research. 71 (2–3): 331–338. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2004.03.003 .
PMID 15474903 .
82. Amador; Lim (1993). "Assessment of insight in psychosis". American Journal of Psychiatry. 150
(6): 873–879. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.457.5515 . doi:10.1176/ajp.150.6.873 . PMID 8494061 .
83. Bedford; Davis (2013). "Denial of illness in schizophrenia as a disturbance of self-reﬂection,
self-perception and insight". Schizophrenia Research. 152 (1): 89–96.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2013.07.006 . PMID 23890596 .
84. "Self Awareness" . Bipolar Insights.
85. Tartakovsky, Margarita (May 17, 2016). "Living with Bipolar Disorder" . psychcentral.com.
86. Mathew, Anandit J.; Samuel, Beulah; Jacob, K.S. (2009). "Perceptions of Illness in Self and in
Others Among Patients With Bipolar Disorder". International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 56 (5):
462–470. doi:10.1177/0020764009106621 . PMID 19651694 .
87. McEvoy, J. P.; Schooler, N. R.; Friedman, E.; Steingard, S.; Allen, M. (1993). "Use of
psychopathology vignettes by patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and by
mental health professionals to judge patients' insight". American Journal of Psychiatry. 150
(11): 1649–1653. doi:10.1176/ajp.150.11.1649 . PMID 8214172 .

88. Fukano, Yuya; Yamawo, Akira (August 26, 2015). "Self-discrimination in the tendrils of the vine
is mediated by physiological connection" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences. 282 (1814): 20151379. doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.1379 . PMC 4571702 .
PMID 26311669 .
89. Robert Kolker Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey, p. 106, Oxford University Press US,
2006 ISBN 978-0-19-517452-6

External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Self-awareness
Ashley GC, Reiter-Palmon R Self-Awareness and the Evolution of Leaders: The Need for a Better
Measure of Self-Awareness

September 2012

3-Step Process for Practicing Self-Awareness , Stephen Warley, Life Skills That Matter, March
2016

Last edited 10 days ago by Shellwood

