For other uses, see Zen (disambiguation).

Zen (Chinese:

禪; pinyin: Chán; Korean: 선, translit. Seon) is a school of Mahayana Buddhism that

originated in China during the Tang dynasty as the Chan school (Chánzong) of Chinese Buddhism
and later developed into various schools. Chán Buddhism was also inﬂuenced by Taoist philosophy,
especially Neo-Daoist thought.[1] From China, Chán spread south to Vietnam and became
Vietnamese Thiền, northeast to Korea to become Seon Buddhism, and east to Japan, becoming
Japanese Zen.[2]

Zen
Chinese name

禪
禅

Traditional Chinese
Simpliﬁed Chinese
Transcriptions
Standard Mandarin
Hanyu Pinyin

Chán

Wade–Giles

Ch'an2

IPA

[ʈʂʰǎn]

Yue: Cantonese
Jyutping

Sim4

Middle Chinese
Middle Chinese

dʑjen
Vietnamese name

Vietnamese

Thiền

Hán-Nôm

禪
Korean name

Hangul

선

Hanja

禪

Transcriptions
Revised Romanization

Seon
Japanese name

Kanji
Transcriptions

禅

Romanization

Zen
Sanskrit name

Sanskrit

यान (dhyāna)

The term Zen is derived from the Japanese pronunciation of the Middle Chinese word

禪 (Chán),

which traces its roots to the Indian practice of dhyāna ("meditation").[note 1] Zen emphasizes rigorous
self-control, meditation-practice, insight into the nature of things (Ch. jianxing, Jp. kensho,
"perceiving the true nature"), and the personal expression of this insight in daily life, especially for
the beneﬁt of others.[4][5] As such, it de-emphasizes mere knowledge of sutras and doctrine[6][7] and
favors direct understanding through spiritual practice and interaction with an accomplished
teacher.[8]
The teachings of Zen include various sources of Mahayana thought, especially Yogachara, the
Tathāgatagarbha sūtras and the Huayan school, with their emphasis on Buddha-nature, totality, and
the Bodhisattva-ideal.[9][10] The Prajñāpāramitā literature[11] as well as Madhyamaka thought have
also been inﬂuential in the shaping of the apophatic and sometimes iconoclastic nature of Zen
rhetoric.

Etymology
The word Zen is derived from the Japanese pronunciation of the Middle Chinese word
(pinyin: Chán), which in turn is derived from the Sanskrit word dhyāna ( यान
approximately translated as "absorption" or "meditative

),[3]

禪 (dʑjen)

which can be

state".[12]

The actual Chinese term for the "Zen school" is Chánzong, while "Chan" just refers to the practice of
meditation itself (xichan) or the study of meditation (chanxue) though it is often used as an
abbreviated form of Chánzong.[13]

Practice
Meditation
See also: Dhyāna in Buddhism

The practice of dhyana or meditation, especially sitting meditation (Ch. zuòchán, Jp. zazen) is a
central part of Zen Buddhism.

The practice of Buddhist meditation ﬁrst entered China through the translations of An Shigao (ﬂ. c.
148–180 CE), and Kumārajīva (334–413 CE), who both translated Dhyāna sutras, which were
inﬂuential early meditation texts mostly based on the Yogacara (yoga praxis) teachings of the
Kashmiri Sarvāstivāda circa 1st-4th centuries CE.[14] Among the most inﬂuential early Chinese
meditation texts include the Anban Shouyi Jing (Sutra on ānāpānasmṛti), the Zuochan Sanmei Jing
(Sutra of sitting dhyāna samādhi) and the Damoduolo Chan Jing (Dharmatrata dhyāna sutra).[15]
While dhyāna in a strict sense refers to the four dhyānas, in Chinese Buddhism, dhyāna may refer to
various kinds of meditation techniques and their preparatory practices, which are necessary to
practice dhyāna.[16] The ﬁve main types of meditation in the Dhyāna sutras are ānāpānasmṛti
(mindfulness of breathing); paṭikūlamanasikāra meditation (mindfulness of the impurities of the
body); maitrī meditation (loving-kindness); the contemplation on the twelve links of
pratītyasamutpāda; and contemplation on the Buddha.[17] According to the modern Chan master
Sheng Yen, these practices are termed the "ﬁve methods for stilling or pacifying the mind" and serve
to focus and purify the mind, and can lead to the dhyana absorptions.[18] Chan also shares the
practice of the four foundations of mindfulness and the Three Gates of Liberation (śūnyatā,
signlessness or animitta and wishlessness or apraṇihita) with early Buddhism and classic
Mahayana.[19]
Early Chan texts also teach forms of meditation that are unique to Mahayana Buddhism, for
example, the Treatise on the Essentials of Cultivating the Mind which depicts the teachings of the
7th-century East Mountain school teaches a visualization of a sun disk, similar to that taught in the
Sutra of the Contemplation of the Buddha Amitáyus.[20]
Later Chinese Buddhists developed their own meditation manuals and texts, one of the most
inﬂuential being the works of the Tiantai patriarch, Zhiyi. His works seemed to have exerted some
inﬂuence on the earliest meditation manuals of the Chán school proper, an early work being the
widely imitated and inﬂuential Tso-chan-i (Principles of sitting meditation, c. 11th century).[21]

Common meditation forms
Mindfulness of breathing

Venerable Hsuan Hua
meditating in the Lotus
Position. Hong Kong, 1953.

The 'meditation hall' (Jp.
zendō, Ch. chántáng) of Dai
Bosatsu Zendo Kongo-Ji

During sitting meditation (

坐禅, Ch. zuòchán, Jp. zazen, Ko. jwaseon), practitioners usually assume a

position such as the lotus position, half-lotus, Burmese, or seiza, often using the dhyāna mudrā.
Often, a square or round cushion placed on a padded mat is used to sit on; in some other cases, a
chair may be used.
To regulate the mind, Zen students are often directed towards counting breaths. Either both
exhalations and inhalations are counted, or one of them only. The count can be up to ten, and then
this process is repeated until the mind is calmed.[22] Zen teachers like Omori Sogen teach a series
of long and deep exhalations and inhalations as a way to prepare for regular breath meditation.[23]
Attention is usually placed on the energy center (dantian) below the navel.[web 1] Zen teachers often
promote diaphragmatic breathing, stating that the breath must come from the lower abdomen
(known as hara or tanden in Japanese), and that this part of the body should expand forward
slightly as one breathes.[24] Over time the breathing should become smoother, deeper and slower.[25]
When the counting becomes an encumbrance, the practice of simply following the natural rhythm of
breathing with concentrated attention is recommended.[26][27]
Silent Illumination and Just Sitting

Another common form of sitting meditation is called "Silent illumination" (Ch. mòzhào, Jp.
mokushō). This practice was traditionally promoted by the Caodong school of Chinese Chan and is
associated with Hongzhi Zhengjue (1091—1157) who wrote various works on the practice.[28] This
method derives from the Indian Buddhist practice of the union (Skt. yuganaddha) of śamatha and
vipaśyanā.[29]
In Hongzhi's practice of "nondual objectless meditation" the mediator strives to be aware of the
totality of phenomena instead of focusing on a single object, without any interference,
conceptualizing, grasping, goal seeking, or subject-object duality.[30]
This practice is also popular in the major schools of Japanese Zen, but especially Sōtō, where it is
more widely known as Shikantaza (Ch. zhǐguǎn dǎzuò, "Just sitting"). Considerable textual,
philosophical, and phenomenological justiﬁcation of the practice can be found throughout the work
of the Japanese Sōtō Zen thinker Dōgen, especially in his Shōbōgenzō, for example in the "Principles
of Zazen"[web 2] and the "Universally Recommended Instructions for Zazen".[web 3] While the
Japanese and the Chinese forms are similar, they are distinct approaches.[31]
Hua Tou and Kōan contemplation
Main article: Kōan

Calligraphy of "Mu" (Hanyu
Pinyin: wú) by Torei Enji. It
ﬁgures in the famous
Zhaozhou's dog kōan

During the Tang dynasty, gōng'àn (Jp. kōan) literature became popular. Literally meaning "public
case", they were stories or dialogues, describing teachings and interactions between Zen masters
and their students. These anecdotes give a demonstration of the master's insight. Kōan are meant
to illustrate the non-conceptual insight (prajña) that the Buddhist teachings point to. During the
Sòng dynasty, a new meditation method was popularized by ﬁgures such as Dahui, which was
called kanhua chan ("observing the phrase" meditation) which referred to contemplation on a single
word or phrase (called the huatou, "critical phrase") of a gōng'àn.[32] In Chinese Chan and Korean
Seon, this practice of "observing the huatou" (hwadu in Korean) is a widely practiced method.[33] It

was taught by the inﬂuential Seon master Chinul (1158–1210), and modern Chinese masters like
Sheng Yen and Xuyun.
In the Japanese Rinzai school, kōan introspection developed its own formalized style, with a
standardized curriculum of kōans which must be studies and "passed" in sequence. This process
includes standardized "checking questions" (sassho) and common sets of "capping phrases"
(jakugo) or poetry citations that are memorized by students as answers.[34] The Zen student's
mastery of a given kōan is presented to the teacher in a private interview (referred to in Japanese as
dokusan, daisan, or sanzen). While there is no unique answer to a kōan, practitioners are expected to
demonstrate their spiritual understanding through their responses. The teacher may approve or
disapprove of the answer and guide the student in the right direction. The interaction with a teacher
is central in Zen, but makes Zen practice also vulnerable to misunderstanding and exploitation.[35]
Kōan-inquiry may be practiced during zazen (sitting meditation), kinhin (walking meditation), and
throughout all the activities of daily life. The goal of the practice is often termed kensho (seeing
one's true nature).
Kōan practice is particularly emphasized in Rinzai, but it also occurs in other schools or branches of
Zen depending on the teaching line.[36]
Nianfo chan
Nianfo (Jp. nembutsu, from Skt. buddhānusmṛti "recollection of the Buddha") refers to the recitation
of the Buddha's name, in most cases the Buddha Amitabha. In Chinese Chan, the Pure Land practice
of nianfo based on the phrase Nāmó Āmítuófó (Homage to Amitabha) is a widely practiced form of
Zen meditation. This practice was adopted from Pure land Buddhism and syncretized with Chan
meditation by Chinese ﬁgures such as Yongming Yanshou, Zhongfen Mingben, and Tianru Weize.
During the late Ming, the harmonization of Pure land practices with Chan meditation was continued
by ﬁgures such as Yunqi Zhuhong and Hanshan Deqing.[37]
This practice, as well as its adaptation into the "nembutsu kōan" was also used by the Japanese
Ōbaku school of Zen.

Pointing to the nature of the mind
According to Charles Luk, in the earliest traditions of Chán, there was no ﬁxed method or formula
for teaching meditation, and all instructions were simply heuristic methods, to point to the true
nature of the mind, also known as Buddha-nature.[38] According to Luk, this method is referred to as
the "Mind Dharma", and exempliﬁed in the story (in the Flower Sermon) of Śākyamuni Buddha
holding up a ﬂower silently, and Mahākāśyapa smiling as he understood.[38] A traditional formula of

this is, "Chán points directly to the human mind, to enable people to see their true nature and
become buddhas."[39]

Bodhisattva virtues and vows

Victoria Zen Centre Jukai
ceremony, January 2009.

Since Zen is a form of Mahayana Buddhism, it is grounded on the schema of the bodhisattva path
which is based on the practice of the "transcendent virtues" or "perfections" (Skt. pāramitā, Ch.
bōluómì, Jp. baramitsu) as well as the taking of the bodhisattva vows.[40][41] The most widely used
list of six virtues is: generosity, moral training (incl. ﬁve precepts), patient endurance, energy or
effort, meditation (dhyana), wisdom. An important source for these teachings is the Avatamsaka
sutra, which also outlines the grounds (bhumis) or levels of the bodhisattva path.[42] The pāramitās
are mentioned in early Chan works such as Bodhidharma's Two entrances and four practices and are
seen as an important part of gradual cultivation (jianxiu) by later Chan ﬁgures like Zongmi.[43][44]
An important element of this practice is the formal and ceremonial taking of refuge in the three
jewels, bodhisattva vows and precepts. Various sets of precepts are taken in Zen including the ﬁve
precepts, "ten essential precepts", and the sixteen bodhisattva precepts.[45][46][47][48] This is
commonly done in an initiation ritual (Ch. shòu jiè, Jp. Jukai, Ko. sugye, "receiving the precepts")
which is also undertaken by lay followers and marks a layperson as a formal Buddhist.[49]
The Chinese Buddhist practice of fasting (zhai), especially during the uposatha days (Ch. zhairi,
"days of fasting") can also be an element of Chan training.[50] Chan masters may go on extended
absolute fasts, as exempliﬁed by master Hsuan Hua's 35 day fast which he undertook during the
Cuban missile crisis for the generation of merit.[51]

The arts and physical culture

Hakuin Ekaku, 'Hotei in a
Boat', Yale University Art
Gallery.

The kare-sansui (dry
landscape) zen garden at
Ryōan-ji

Two grandmasters of the
Shaolin Temple of Chinese
Chan, Shi DeRu and Shi
DeYang.

Certain arts such as painting, calligraphy, poetry, gardening, ﬂower arrangement, tea ceremony and
others have also been used as part of zen training and practice. Classical Chinese arts like brush
painting and calligraphy were used by Chan monk painters such as Guanxiu and Muqi Fachang to
communicate their spiritual understanding in unique ways to their students.[52] Zen paintings are
sometimes termed zenga in Japanese.[53] Hakuin is one Japanese Zen master who was known to
create a large corpus of unique sumi-e (ink and wash paintings) and Japanese calligraphy to
communicate zen in a visual way. His work and that of his disciples were widely inﬂuential in
Japanese Zen.[54] Another example of Zen arts can be seen in the short lived Fuke sect of Japanese
Zen which practiced a unique form of "blowing zen" (suizen) by playing the shakuhachi bamboo
ﬂute.
Traditional martial arts, like Japanese archery, other forms of Japanese budō and Chinese martial
arts (gōngfu) have also been seen as forms of zen praxis. This tradition goes back to the inﬂuential
Shaolin Monastery in Henan, which developed the ﬁrst institutionalized form of gōngfu.[55] By the
late Ming, Shaolin gōngfu was very popular and widespread, as evidenced by mentions in various

forms of Ming literature (featuring staff wielding ﬁghting monks like Sun Wukong) and historical
sources which also speak of Shaolin's impressive monastic army that rendered military service to
the state in return for patronage.[56] These Shaolin practices, which began to develop around the
12th century, were also traditionally seen as a form of Chan Buddhist inner cultivation (today called
wuchan, "martial chan"). The Shaolin arts also made use of Taoist physical exercises (taoyin)
breathing and energy cultivation (qìgōng) practices.[57][58] They were seen as therapeutic practices
which improved "internal strength" (neili), health and longevity (lit. "nourishing life" yangsheng), as
well as means to spiritual liberation.[59] The inﬂuence of these Taoist practices can be seen in the
work of Wang Zuyuan (ca. 1820–after 1882), a scholar and minor bureaucrat who studied at
Shaolin. Wang's Illustrated Exposition of Internal Techniques (Neigong tushuo) shows how Shaolin
exercises were drawn from Taoist methods like those of the Yi jin jing and Eight pieces of brocade,
possibly inﬂuenced by the Ming dynasty's spirit of religious syncretism.[60] According to the modern
Chan master Sheng Yen, Chinese Buddhism has adopted internal cultivation exercises from the
Shaolin tradition as ways to "harmonize the body and develop concentration in the midst of activity."
This is because, "techniques for harmonizing the vital energy are powerful assistants to the
cultivation of samadhi and spiritual insight."[61]
Korean Seon also has developed a similar form of active physical training, termed Sunmudo.
In Japan, the classic combat arts (budō) and zen practice have been in contact since the embrace
of Rinzai Zen by the Hōjō clan in the 13th century, who applied zen discipline to their martial
practice.[62] One inﬂuential ﬁgure in this relationship was the Rinzai priest Takuan Sōhō who was
well known for his writings on zen and budō addressed to the samurai class (especially his The
Unfettered Mind) .[63] The Rinzai school also adopted certain Taoist energy practices. They were
introduced by Hakuin (1686-1769) who learned various techniques from a hermit named Hakuyu
who helped Hakuin cure his "Zen sickness" (a condition of physical and mental exhaustion).[64]

Intensive group practice
Intensive group meditation may be practiced occasionally in some temples. In the Japanese
language, this practice is called sesshin. While the daily routine may require monks to meditate for
several hours each day, during the intensive period they devote themselves almost exclusively zen
practice. The numerous 30–50 minute long sitting meditation (zazen) periods are interwoven with
rest breaks, ritualized formal meals (Jp. oryoki), and short periods of work (Jp. samu) that are to be
performed with the same state of mindfulness. In modern Buddhist practice in Japan, Taiwan, and
the West, lay students often attend these intensive practice sessions or retreats. These are held at
many Zen centers or temples.

Zen chanting and rituals

Chanting The Buddhist
Scriptures, by Taiwanese
painter Li Mei-shu.

Gifu Daibutsu and altar at
Shōhō-ji.

Play media
Monks chant the "Heart Sutra"
in Sōji-ji Temple in Yokohama,
Japan.
See also: Buddhist chant

Most Zen monasteries, temples and centers perform various rituals, services and ceremonies (such
as initiation ceremonies and funerals) which are always always accompanied by the chanting of
verses, poems or sutras.[65] There are also ceremonies which are speciﬁcally for the purpose of
sutra recitation (Ch. niansong, Jp. nenju) itself.[66] Zen schools may have an oﬃcial sutra book which
collects these writings (in Japanese, these are called kyohon).[65] Practitioners may chant major
Mahayana sutras such as the Heart Sutra and chapter 25 of the Lotus Sutra (often called the
"Avalokiteśvara Sutra"). Dhāraṇīs and Zen poems may also be part of a Zen temple liturgy, including
texts like the Song of the Precious Mirror Samadhi, the Sandokai, the Nīlakaṇṭha Dhāraṇī, and the
Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya Dhāraṇī Sūtra.

The butsudan is the altar in a monastery, temple or a lay person's home, where offerings are made to
the images of the Buddha, bodhisattvas and deceased family members and ancestors. Rituals
usually center on major Buddhas or bodhisattvas like Avalokiteśvara (see Guanyin), Kṣitigarbha and
Manjushri.
An important element in Zen ritual practice is the performance of ritual prostrations (Jp. raihai) or
bows.[67]
One popular form of ritual in Japanese Zen is Mizuko kuyō (Water child) ceremonies, which are
performed for those who have had a miscarriage, stillbirth, or abortion. These ceremonies are also
performed in American Zen Buddhism.[68] A widely practiced ritual in Chinese Chan is variously
called the "Rite for releasing the hungry ghosts" or the "Releasing ﬂaming mouth". The ritual might
date back to the Tang dynasty, and was very popular during the Ming and Qing dynasties, when
Chinese Esoteric Buddhist practices became diffused throughout Chinese Buddhism.[69] The
Chinese holiday of the Ghost Festival might also be celebrated with similar rituals for the dead.
These ghost rituals are a source of contention in modern Chinese Chan, and masters such as Sheng
Yen criticize the practice for not having "any basis in Buddhist teachings".[70]
Another important type of ritual practiced in Zen are various repentance or confession rituals (Jp.
zange) which were widely practiced in all forms of Chinese Mahayana Buddhism. One popular Chan
text on this is known as the Emperor Liang Repentance Ritual, composed by Chan master Baozhi.[71]
Dogen also wrote a treatise on repentance, the Shushogi.[72] Other rituals could include rites dealing
with local deities (kami in Japan), and ceremonies on Buddhist holidays such as Buddha's
Birthday.[73]
Funerals are also an important ritual and are a common point of contact between Zen monastics
and the laity. Statistics published by the Sōtō school state that 80 percent of Sōtō laymen visit their
temple only for reasons having to do with funerals and death. Seventeen percent visit for spiritual
reasons and 3 percent visit a Zen priest at a time of personal trouble or crisis.[74]

Esoteric practices
Depending on the tradition, esoteric methods such as mantra and dhāraṇī are also used for different
purposes including meditation practice, protection from evil, invoking great compassion, invoking
the power of certain bodhisattvas, and are chanted during ceremonies and rituals.[75][76] In the Kwan
Um school of Zen for example, a mantra of Guanyin (“Kwanseum Bosal”) is used during sitting
meditation.[77] The Heart Sutra Mantra is also another mantra that is used in Zen during various
rituals.[78] Another example is the Mantra of Light (kōmyō shingon), which is common in Japanese
Soto Zen and was derived from the Shingon sect.[79]

The usage of esoteric mantras in Zen goes back to the Tang dynasty, and there is evidence that
Chan Buddhists adopted practices from Esoteric Buddhism in ﬁndings from Dunhuang.[80]
According to Henrik Sørensen, several successors of Shenxiu (such as Jingxian and Yixing) were
also students of the Zhenyan (Mantra) school.[81] Inﬂuential esoteric dhāraṇī, such as the Uṣṇīṣa
Vijaya Dhāraṇī Sūtra, also begin to be cited in the literature of the Baotang school during the Tang
dynasty.[82]
There is also documentation that monks living at Shaolin temple during the eighth century
performed esoteric practices there such as mantra and dharani, and that these also inﬂuenced
Korean Seon Buddhism.[83] During the Joseon dynasty, the Seon school was not only the dominant
tradition in Korea, but it was also highly inclusive and ecumenical in its doctrine and practices, and
this included Esoteric Buddhist lore and rituals (which appear in Seon literature from the 15th
century onwards). According to Sørensen, the writings of several Seon masters (such as Hyujeong)
reveal they were esoteric adepts.[84]
In Japanese Zen, the use of esoteric practices within Zen is sometimes termed "mixed Zen" (kenshū
zen

兼修禪), and the ﬁgure of Keizan Jōkin (1264–1325) is seen as introducing this into the Soto

school.[85][86] The Japanese founder of the Rinzai school, Myōan Eisai (1141–1215) was also a well
known practitioner of esoteric Buddhism and wrote various works on the subject.[87]
According to William Bodiford, a very common dhāraṇī in Japanese Zen is the Śūraṅgama spell
(Ryōgon shu

楞嚴呪; T. 944A), which is repeatedly chanted during summer training retreats as well

as at "every important monastic ceremony throughout the year" in Zen monasteries.[88] Some Zen
temples also perform esoteric rituals, such as the homa ritual which is performed at the Soto

temple of Eigen-ji. As Bodiford writes "perhaps the most notable examples of this phenomenon is
the ambrosia gate (kanro mon

⽢露⾨) ritual performed at every Sōtō Zen temple", which is

associated feeding hungry ghosts, ancestor memorial rites and the ghost festival.[89] Bodiford also
notes that formal Zen rituals of Dharma transmission often involve esoteric initiations

Doctrine
Main article: Doctrinal background of Zen

A Dharma talk by Seon nun Daehaeng
Kun Sunim, Hanmaum Seon Center,
South Korea.

Though Zen-narrative states that it is a "special transmission outside scriptures" which "did not
stand upon words",[90] Zen does have a rich doctrinal background, which is ﬁrmly grounded in the
Buddhist tradition.[91] It was thoroughly inﬂuenced by Mahayana teachings on the bodhisattva path,
Chinese Madhyamaka (Sānlùn), Yogacara (Wéishí), Prajñaparamita, the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra, and other
Buddha nature texts.[92][93][94] The inﬂuence of Madhyamaka and Prajñaparamita can be discerned in
the stress on non-conceptual wisdom (prajña) and the apophatic language of Zen
literature.[92][web 4][95][note 2]
The philosophy of the Huayan school also had an inﬂuence on Chinese Chan. One example is the
Huayan doctrine of the interpenetration of phenomena which also makes use of native Chinese
philosophical concepts such as principle (li) and phenomena (shi).[96] The Huayan theory of the
Fourfold Dharmadhatu also inﬂuenced the Five Ranks of Dongshan Liangjie (806-869), the founder
of the Caodong Chan lineage.[97]
Zen teachings can be likened to "the ﬁnger pointing at the moon".[98] Zen teachings point to the
moon, awakening, "a realization of the unimpeded interpenetration of the dharmadhatu".[99] But the
Zen-tradition also warns against taking its teachings, the pointing ﬁnger, to be this insight
itself.[100][web 5][web 6][101]
Various Zen traditions have varying views on awakening or enlightenment (bodhi). According to
Stuart Lachs, one view is that one's mind is already enlightened, this is termed pen chueh in Chinese
Buddhism and hongaku in Japanese Zen.[102] Another view is that there is an actual point in time in
which one passes from ignorance to realization (Ch. shih-chueh).[103]
Another important issue widely debated in Zen is that of how awakening happens. Beginning with
the combative ﬁgure of Shenhui (684-758), the idea that there were two ways to enlightenment
emerged. One was a sudden way (McRae: "the position that enlightenment occurs in a single
transformation that is both total and instantaneous") while the other was the gradual or progressive
way (which Shenhui saw as inferior).[104] The issue is discussed in the Platform Sutra, which
attempts to resolve the conﬂict, as well as by later Chan writers.[105]

Caodong\Soto

Japanese Buddhist monk from
the Sōtō Zen sect
Main article: Sōtō

Sōtō is the Japanese line of the Chinese Caodong school, which was founded during the Tang
Dynasty by Dongshan Liangjie. The Sōtō-school has de-emphasized kōans since Gentō Sokuchū
(circa 1800), and instead emphasized on shikantaza.[106] Dogen, the founder of Soto in Japan,
emphasized that practice and awakening cannot be separated. By practicing shikantaza, attainment
and Buddhahood are already being expressed.[107] For Dogen, zazen, or shikantaza, is the essence
of Buddhist practice.[108] Gradual cultivation was also recognized by Dongshan Liangjie.[web 7]

Linji\Rinzai
Main article: Rinzai school

The Rinzai school is the Japanese lineage of the Chinese Linji school, which was founded during the
Tang dynasty by Linji Yixuan.The Rinzai school emphasizes kensho, insight into one's true
nature.[109] This is followed by so-called post-satori practice, further practice to attain
Buddhahood.[110][111][112]
Other Zen-teachers have also expressed sudden insight followed by gradual cultivation. Jinul, a
12th-century Korean Seon master, followed Zongmi, and also emphasized that insight into our true
nature is sudden, but is to be followed by practice to ripen the insight and attain full buddhahood.
This is also the standpoint of the contemporary Sanbo Kyodan, according to whom kenshō is at the
start of the path to full enlightenment.[113]
To attain this primary insight and to deepen it, zazen and kōan-study is deemed essential. This
trajectory of initial insight followed by a gradual deepening and ripening is expressed by Linji in his

Three Mysterious Gates and Hakuin Ekaku's Four Ways of Knowing.[114] Another example of
depiction of stages on the path are the Ten Bulls, which detail the steps on the path.

Zen scripture

Archaeologist Aurel Stein’s 1907
view of Mogao Cave 16, with altar
and sutra scrolls.

Tablets of the Tripiṭaka Koreana, an
early edition of the Chinese
Buddhist canon, in Haeinsa
Temple, South Korea.
Main article: Zen and Sutras

The role of scripture in Zen
Contrary to the popular image, literature does play a role in the Zen training. Zen is deeply rooted in
the teachings and doctrines of Mahāyāna Buddhism.[115] Classic Zen texts, such as the Platform
sutra, contain numerous references to Buddhist canonical sutras.[116] Unsui (Zen-monks), "are
expected to become familiar with the classics of the Zen canon".[117] A review of the early historical
documents and literature of early Zen masters clearly reveals that they were well versed in
numerous Mahāyāna sūtras,[6][note 3][note 4][6][note 5] as well as Mahayana Buddhist philosophy such as
Madhyamaka.[92]

Nevertheless, Zen is often pictured as anti-intellectual.[115] This picture of Zen emerged during the
Song Dynasty (960–1297), when Chán became the dominant form of Buddhism in China, and
gained great popularity among the educated and literary classes of Chinese society. The use of
koans, which are highly stylized literary texts, reﬂects this popularity among the higher classes.[120]
The famous saying "do not establish words and letters", attributed in this period to
Bodhidharma,[121]

...was taken not as a denial of the recorded words of the Buddha or the
doctrinal elaborations by learned monks, but as a warning to those who
had become confused about the relationship between Buddhist teaching
as a guide to the truth and mistook it for the truth itself.[122]

What the Zen tradition emphasizes is that the enlightenment of the Buddha came not through
conceptualization but rather through direct insight.[123] But direct insight has to be supported by
study and understanding (hori[124]) of the Buddhist teachings and texts.[125][note 6] Intellectual
understanding without practice is called yako-zen, "wild fox Zen", but "one who has only experience
without intellectual understanding is a zen temma, 'Zen devil' ".[127]

Grounding Chán in scripture
The early Buddhist schools in China were each based on a speciﬁc sutra. At the beginning of the
Tang Dynasty, by the time of the Fifth Patriarch Hongren (601–674), the Zen school became
established as a separate school of Buddhism.[128] It had to develop a doctrinal tradition of its own
to ascertain its position[120] and to ground its teachings in a speciﬁc sutra. Various sutras were used
for this even before the time of Hongren: the Śrīmālādevī Sūtra (Huike),[129] Awakening of Faith
(Daoxin),[129] the Lankavatara Sutra (East Mountain School),[129][6] the Diamond Sutra[130]
(Shenhui),[129] and the Platform Sutra.[6][130] None of these sutras were decisive though, since the
school drew inspiration from a variety of sources.[131] Subsequently, the Zen tradition produced a
rich corpus of written literature which has become a part of its practice and teaching. Other
inﬂuential sutras are the Vimalakirti Sutra,[132][133][134] Avatamsaka Sutra,[135] the Shurangama
Sutra,[136] and the Mahaparinirvana Sutra.[137]

Zen literature
See also: Zen literature

The Zen-tradition developed a rich textual tradition, based on the interpretation of the Buddhist
teachings and the recorded sayings of Zen-masters. Important texts are the Platform Sutra (8th
century), attributed to Huineng ;[120] the Chán transmission records, teng-lu,[138] such as The Records
of the Transmission of the Lamp (Ching-te ch'uan-teng lu), compiled by Tao-yün and published in
1004;[139] the "yü-lü" genre[140] consisting of the recorded sayings of the masters, and the encounter
dialogues; the koan-collections, such as the "Gateless Gate" and the "Blue Cliff Record".

Zen organization and institutions
Main articles: Zen organisation and institutions, Zen ranks and hierarchy, Dharma transmission, and Zen lineage charts

Religion is not only an individual matter, but "also a collective endeavour".[141] Though individual
experience[142] and the iconoclastic picture of Zen[143] are emphasised in the Western world, the
Zen-tradition is maintained and transferred by a high degree of institutionalisation and
hierarchy.[144][145] In Japan, modernity has led to criticism of the formal system and the
commencement of lay-oriented Zen-schools such as the Sanbo Kyodan[146] and the Ningen Zen
Kyodan.[web 8] How to organize the continuity of the Zen-tradition in the West, constraining
charismatic authority and the derailment it may bring on the one hand,[147][148][35] and maintaining
the legitimacy and authority by limiting the number of authorized teachers on the other hand,[141] is
a challenge for the developing Zen-communities in the West.

Zen narratives
Main article: Zen Narratives

The Chán of the Tang Dynasty, especially that of Mazu and Linji with its emphasis on "shock
techniques", in retrospect was seen as a golden age of Chán.[120] This picture has gained great
popularity in the West in the 20th century, especially due to the inﬂuence of D.T. Suzuki,[149] and
further popularized by Hakuun Yasutani and the Sanbo Kyodan.[142] This picture has been
challenged, and complemented, since the 1970s by modern scientiﬁc research on
Zen.[150][151][120][152][153][154]
Modern scientiﬁc research on the history of Zen discerns three main narratives concerning Zen, its
history and its teachings: Traditional Zen Narrative (TZN),[155][web 9] Buddhist Modernism (BM),[149]
Historical and Cultural Criticism (HCC).[155] An external narrative is Nondualism, which claims Zen to
be a token of a universal nondualist essence of religions.[156][157]

History

Chinese Chán

Huike Offering His Arm to
Bodhidharma, Sesshū Tōyō (1496).
Main article: Chinese Chán
See also: Silk Road transmission of Buddhism

Zen (Chinese: Chán

禪) Buddhism as we know it today is the result of a long history, with many

changes and contingent factors. Each period had different types of Zen, some of which remained
inﬂuential while others vanished.[120] The history of Chán in China is divided into various periods by
different scholars, who generally distinguish a classical phase and a post-classical period. One way
to outline the history of the Chinese classical period is McRae's division into four phases or periods:
Proto, Early, Middle and Song Dynasty Chán.[158] The post-classical period can also be divided in
multiple phases and would also include forms of Chán Buddhist modernisms arising as a reaction
to Western imperialism.[159][note 7]
Proto-Chán
Proto-Chán (c. 500–600) encompasses the Southern and Northern Dynasties period (420 to 589)
and Sui Dynasty (589–618 CE). In this phase, Chán developed in multiple locations in northern
China. It was based on the practice of dhyana and is connected to the ﬁgures of Bodhidharma and
Huike, though there is little actual historical information about these early ﬁgures and most
legendary stories about their life come from later, mostly Tang sources.[120] An important text from
this period is the Two Entrances and Four Practices, found in Dunhuang, and attributed to

Bodhidharma.[160] Later sources mention that these ﬁgures taught using the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra
though there is no direct evidence of this from the earliest sources.[161][162]
Early Chán
Early Chán refers to early Tang Dynasty (618–750) Chán. The ﬁfth patriarch Daman Hongren (601–
674), and his dharma-heir Yuquan Shenxiu (606?–706) were inﬂuential in founding the ﬁrst Chan
institution in Chinese history, known as the “East Mountain school” (Dongshan famen).[163] Shenxiu
was the most inﬂuential and charismatic student of Hongren, he was even invited to the Imperial
Court by Empress Wu.[164] Shenxiu also became the target of much criticism by Shenhui (670–762),
for his "gradualist" teachings. Shenhui instead promoted the "sudden" teachings of his teacher
Huineng (638–713) as well as what later became a very inﬂuential Chán classic called the Platform
Sutra.[165] Shenhui's propaganda campaign eventually succeeded in elevating Huineng to the status
of sixth patriarch of Chinese Chán.[166][120] The sudden vs. gradual debate that developed in this era
came to deﬁne later forms of Chan Buddhism.[167]
Middle Chán
The Middle Chán (c. 750–1000) period runs from the An Lushan Rebellion (755–763) to the Five
Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period (907–960/979). This phase saw the development new schools
of Chan. The most important of these schools is the Hongzhou school of Mazu Daoyi (709–788), to
which also belong Shitou, Baizhang, and Huangbo. This school is sometimes seen as the archetypal
expression of Chán, with its emphasis on the personal expression of insight, and its rejection of
positive statements, as well as the importance it placed on spontaneous and unconventional
"questions and answers during an encounter" (linji wenda) between master and disciple.[168][169]
However, modern scholars have seen much of the literature which presents these "iconoclastic"
encounters as being later revisions during the Song era, and instead see the Hongzhou masters as
not being very radical, instead promoting pretty conservative ideas, such as keeping precepts,
accumulating good karma and practicing meditation.[170] However, the school did produce
innovative teachings and perspectives such as Mazu's views that "this mind is Buddha" and that
"ordinary mind is the way", which were also critiqued by later ﬁgures, such as the inﬂuential Guifeng
Zongmi (780–841), for failing to differentiate between ignorance and enlightenment.[171]
By the end of the late Tang, the Hongzhou school was gradually superseded by various regional
traditions, which became known as the Five Houses of Chán. Shitou Xiqian (710–790) is regarded
as the Patriarch of Cáodòng (Jp. Sōtō) school, while Linji Yixuan (died 867) is regarded as the
founder of Línjì (Jp. Rinzai) school. Both of these traditions were quite inﬂuential both in and
outside of China. Another inﬂuential Chán master of the late Tang was Xuefeng Yicun. During the
later Tang, the practice of the "encounter dialogue" reached its full maturity. These formal dialogues

between master and disciple used absurd, illogical and iconoclastic language as well as non-verbal
forms of communication such as the drawing of circles and physical gestures like shouting and
hitting.[172] It was also common to write ﬁctional encounter dialogues and attribute them to
previous Chán ﬁgures.[172] An important text from this period is the Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall
(952), which gives many "encounter-stories", as well as establishing a genealogy of the Chán
school.[173]
The Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution in 845 was devastating for metropolitan Chan, but the Chan
school of Mazu survived, and took a leading role in the Chan of the later Tang.[174]
Song Dynasty Chán

Dahui introduced the method
of kan huatou, or "inspecting
the critical phrase", of a kōan
story. This method was called
the "Chan of kōan
introspection" (Kanhua
Chan).[175]

During Song Dynasty Chán (c. 950–1300), Chán Buddhism took its deﬁnitive shape, developed the
use of koans for individual study and meditation and formalized its own idealized history with the
legend of the Tang "golden age".[176][120] During the Song, Chán became the largest sect of Chinese
Buddhism and had strong ties to the imperial government which led to the development of a highly
organized system of temple rank and administration.[177] The dominant form of Song Chán was the
Linji school due to support from the scholar-oﬃcial class and the imperial court.[178] This school
developed the study of gong'an ("public case") literature which depicted stories of master student
encounters that were seen as demonstrations of the awakened mind.[179]
During the 12th century, a rivalry emerged between the Linji and the Caodong schools for the
support of the scholar-oﬃcial class. Hongzhi Zhengjue (1091–1157) of the Caodong school

emphasized silent illumination or serene reﬂection (mòzhào) as a means for solitary practice, which
could be undertaken by lay-followers. The Linji school's Dahui Zonggao (1089–1163) meanwhile,
introduced k'an-hua chan ("observing the word-head" chan) which involved meditation on the crucial
phrase or "punch line" (hua-tou) of a gong'an.[180][181]
The Song also saw the syncretism of Chán and Pure Land Buddhism by Yongming Yanshou (904–
975) which would later become extremely inﬂuential.[182] Yongming also echoed Zongmi's work in
indicating that the values of Taoism and Confucianism could also be embraced and integrated into
Buddhism. Chán also inﬂuenced Neo-Confucianism as well as certain forms of Taoism, such as the
Quanzhen school.[183][184]
The classic Chan koan collections, such as the Blue Cliff Record and the Gateless barrier were
assembled in this period,[185] which reﬂect the learned inﬂuence of the highly intellectual scholaroﬃcial class or "literati" on the development of Chán.[186][121] In this phase Chán is transported to
Japan, and exerts a great inﬂuence on Korean Seon via Jinul.
Post-Classical Chán
During the Ming Dynasty, the Chán school was so dominant that all Chinese monks were aﬃliated
with either the Linji school or the Caodong school.[187]
Some scholars see the post-classical phase as being an "age of syncretism."[188] The post-classical
period saw the increasing popularity of the dual practice of Chán and Pure Land Buddhism (known
as nianfo Chan), as seen in the teachings of Zhongfeng Mingben (1263–1323) and the great
reformer Hanshan Deqing (1546–1623). This became a widespread phenomenon and in time much
of the distinction between them was lost, with many monasteries teaching both Chán meditation
and the Pure Land practice of nianfo.[189][190][191] The Ming dynasty saw increasing efforts by ﬁgures
such as Yunqi Zhuhong (1535-1615) and Daguan Zhenke (1543-1603) to revive and reconcile Chan
Buddhism with the practice of scriptural study and writing.[188]
In the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, Chán was "reinvented", by the "revival of beating and shouting
practices" by Miyun Yuanwu (1566–1642), and the publication of the Wudeng yantong ("The strict
transmission of the ﬁve Chan schools") by Feiyin Tongrong’s (1593–1662), a dharma heir of Miyun
Yuanwu. The book placed self-proclaimed Chan monks without proper Dharma transmission in the
category of "lineage unknown" (sifa weixiang), thereby excluding several prominent Caodongmonks.[192]
Modern era

Xuyun was one of the most
inﬂuential Chán Buddhists of
the 19th and 20th
centuries.[193]

After further centuries of decline during the Qing Dynasty (1644–1912), Chán activity was revived
again in the 19th and 20th centuries by a ﬂurry of modernist activity. This period saw the rise of
worldly Chan activism, what is sometimes called Humanistic Buddhism (or more literally "Buddhism
for human life", rensheng fojiao), promoted by ﬁgures like Jing'an (1851-1912), Yuanying (18781953), Taixu (1890-1947), Xuyun (1840-1959) and Yinshun (1906-2005). These ﬁgures promoted
social activism to address issues such as poverty and social injustice, as well as participation in
political movements. They also promoted modern science and scholarship, including the use of the
methods of modern critical scholarship to study the history of Chan.[194]
Many Chán teachers today trace their lineage back to Xuyun, including Sheng-yen and Hsuan Hua,
who have propagated Chán in the West where it has grown steadily through the 20th and 21st
centuries.
Chán Buddhism was repressed in China during the 1960s in the Cultural Revolution, but in the
subsequent reform and opening up period in the 1970s, a revival of Chinese Buddhism has been
taking place on the mainland, while Buddhism has a signiﬁcant following in Taiwan and Hong Kong
as well as among Overseas Chinese.

Spread outside of China
Vietnamese Thiền

Thích Nhất Hạnh leading a namo
avalokiteshvaraya chanting session
with monastics from his Order of
Interbeing, Germany 2010.
See also: Vietnamese Thiền and Buddhism in Vietnam

Chan was introduced to Vietnam during the early Chinese occupation periods (111 BCE to 939 CE)
as Thiền. During the Lý (1009–1225) and Trần (1225 to 1400) dynasties, Thiền rose to prominence
among the elites and the royal court and a new native tradition was founded, the Trúc Lâm
("Bamboo Grove") school, which also contained Confucian and Taoist inﬂuences. In the 17th
century, the Linji school was brought to Vietnam as the Lâm Tế, which also mixed Chan and Pure
land. Lâm Tế remains the largest monastic order in the country today.[195]
Modern Vietnamese Thiền is inﬂuenced by Buddhist modernism.[196] Important ﬁgures include
Thiền master Thích Thanh Từ (1924–), the activist and popularizer Thích Nhất Hạnh (1926–) and
the philosopher Thích Thiên-Ân. Vietnamese Thiền is eclectic and inclusive, bringing in many
practices such as breath meditation, nianfo, mantra, Theravada inﬂuences, chanting, sutra recitation
and engaged Buddhism activism.
Korean Seon

Jogyesa is the headquarters of the
Jogye Order. The temple was ﬁrst
established in 1395, at the dawn of the
Joseon Dynasty.
See also: Korean Seon and Buddhism in Korea

Seon (선) was gradually transmitted into Korea during the late Silla period (7th through 9th
centuries) as Korean monks began to travel to China to learn the newly developing Chan tradition of
Mazu Daoyi and returned home to establish the Chan school. They established the initial Seon

九⼭, gusan).

schools of Korea which were known as the "nine mountain schools" (

Seon received its most signiﬁcant impetus and consolidation from the Goryeo monk Jinul (1158–
1210), who is considered the most inﬂuential ﬁgure in the formation of the mature Seon school. He
founded the Jogye Order, which remains the largest Seon tradition in Korea today. Jinul founded the
Songgwangsa temple as a new center of Seon study and practice. Jinul also wrote extensive works
on Seon, developing a comprehensive system of thought and practice. From Dahui Zonggao, Jinul
adopted the hwadu method, which remains the main meditation form taught in Seon today.
Buddhism was mostly suppressed during the strictly Confucian Joseon Dynasty (1392–1910), and
the number of monasteries and clergy sharply declined. The period of Japanese occupation also
brought numerous modernist ideas and changes to Korean Seon. Some monks began to adopt the
Japanese practice of marrying and having families, while others such as Yongseong, worked to
resist the Japanese occupation. Today, the largest Seon school, the Jogye, enforces celibacy, while
the second largest, the Taego Order, allows for married priests. Important modernist ﬁgures which
inﬂuenced contemporary Seon include Seongcheol and Gyeongheo. Seon has also been transmitted
to West, with new traditions such as the Kwan Um School of Zen.
Japanese Zen
See also: Buddhism in Japan and Japanese Zen

Sojiji Temple, of the Soto Zen
school, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Japan

Zen was not introduced as a separate school until the 12th century, when Myōan Eisai traveled to
China and returned to establish a Linji lineage, which eventually perished.[web 10] Decades later,

南浦紹明) (1235–1308) also studied Linji teachings in China before founding the

Nanpo Shōmyō (

Japanese Otokan lineage, the most inﬂuential and only surviving lineage of Rinzai in Japan.[web 10] In
1215, Dōgen, a younger contemporary of Eisai's, journeyed to China himself, where he became a
disciple of the Caodong master Tiantong Rujing. After his return, Dōgen established the Sōtō
school, the Japanese branch of Caodong.

曹洞), Rinzai (臨済), and

The three traditional schools of Zen in contemporary Japan are the Sōtō (

⿈檗). Of these, Sōtō is the largest, and Ōbaku the smallest, with Rinzai in the middle. These

Ōbaku (

schools are further divided into subschools by head temple, with two head temples for Sōtō (Sōji-ji
and Eihei-ji, with Sōji-ji having a much larger network), fourteen head temples for Rinzai, and one
head temple (Manpuku-ji) for Ōbaku, for a total of 17 head temples. The Rinzai head temples, which
are most numerous, have substantial overlap with the traditional Five Mountain System, and include
Myoshin-ji, Nanzen-ji, Tenryū-ji, Daitoku-ji, and Tofuku-ji, among others.
Besides these traditional organizations, there are modern Zen organisations which have especially
attracted Western lay followers, namely the Sanbo Kyodan and the FAS Society.
Zen in the West
See also: Buddhism in the West and Zen in the United States

Although it is diﬃcult to trace the precise moment when the West ﬁrst became aware of Zen as a
distinct form of Buddhism, the visit of Soyen Shaku, a Japanese Zen monk, to Chicago during the
World Parliament of Religions in 1893 is often pointed to as an event that enhanced the proﬁle of
Zen in the Western world. It was during the late 1950s and the early 1960s that the number of
Westerners other than the descendants of Asian immigrants who were pursuing a serious interest
in Zen began to reach a signiﬁcant level. Japanese Zen has gained the greatest popularity in the
West. The various books on Zen by Reginald Horace Blyth, Alan Watts, Philip Kapleau and D. T.
Suzuki published between 1950 and 1975, contributed to this growing interest in Zen in the West, as
did the interest on the part of beat poets such as Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg and Gary Snyder.[197]
In 1958, the literary magazine Chicago Review played a signiﬁcant role in introducing Zen to the
American literary community[198] when it published a special issue[199] on Zen featuring the
aforementioned beat poets and works in translation.

See also
List of Buddhists

Outline of Buddhism
Timeline of Buddhism
Chinese Chán
101 Zen Stories
Chinso
Shussan Shaka

Notes
1. Dumoulin writes in his preface to Zen. A History. Part One: India and China: "Zen (Chin. Ch'an, an
abbreviation of ch'an-na, which transliterates the Sanskrit Dhyāna (Devanagari: यान) or its Pali
cognate Jhāna (Sanskrit; Pāli झान) , terms meaning "meditation") is the name of a Mahayana
Buddhist school of meditation originating in China. It is characterized by the practice of meditation
in the lotus position (Jpn., zazen; Chin., tso-ch'an and the use of the koan (Chin., kung-an) as well as
by the enlightenment experience of satori[3]
2. According to Kalupahana, the inﬂuence of Yofacara is stronger in the ts'ao-tung school and the
tradition of silent meditation, while the inﬂuence of Madhyamaka is clear in the koan-tradition and
its stress on insight and the use of paradoxical language.[95]
3. Sasaki's translation of the Linji yulu contains an extensive biography of 62 pages, listing
inﬂuential Chinese Buddhist texts which played a role in Song dynasty Chán.[118]
4. Albert Low: "It is evident that the masters were well versed in the sutras. Zen master Tokusan, for
example, knew the Diamond Sutra well and, before meeting with his own Zen master, lectured upon
it extensively; the founder of the Zen sect, Bodhidharma, the very one who preached selfrealization
outside the scriptures, nevertheless advocated the Lankavatara Sutra; Zen master Hogen knew the
Avatamsaka Sutra well, and koan twenty-six in the Mumonkan, in which Hogen is involved, comes
out of the teaching of that sutra. Other koans, too, make reference directly or indirectly to the sutras.
The autobiography of yet another Zen master, Hui Neng, subsequently became the Platform Sutra,
one of those sutras so condemned by those who reject intellectual and sutra studies"[119]
5. Poceski: "Direct references to speciﬁc scriptures are relatively rare in the records of Mazu and his
disciples, but that does not mean that they rejected the canon or repudiated its authority. On the
contrary, one of the striking features of their records is that they are ﬁlled with scriptural quotations
and allusions, even though the full extent of their usage of canonical sources is not immediately
obvious and its discernment requires familiarity with Buddhist literature." See source for a full-length
example from "one of Mazu's sermons", in which can be found references to the Vimalakīrti

Scripture, the Huayan Scripture, the Mahāsamnipata-sūtra, the Foshuo Foming Scripture
the Lankāvatāra scripture and the Faju jing.[6]

佛說佛名經,

6. Hakuin goes as far as to state that the buddhat path even starts with study: "[A] person [...] must
ﬁrst gain wide-ranging knowledge, accumulate a treasure-store of wisdom by studying all the
Buddhist sutras and commentaries, reading through all the classic works Buddhist and nonBuddhist
and perusing the writings of the wise men of other traditions. It is for that reason the vow states
"the Dharma teachings are inﬁnite, I vow to study them all.""[126]
7. During the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) and the Qing Dynasty (1644–1912) Chán was part of a
larger, syncretic Buddhist culture. A ﬁnal phase can be distinguished from the 19th century onward,
when western imperialism had a growing inﬂuence in South-East Asia, including China. A side effect
of this imperial inﬂuence was the modernisation of Asian religions, adapting them to western ideas
and rhetorical strategies.[149]

References
1. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

of the International Conference of Orientalists in

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 79.

Japan (TICOJ) 37, 42-57.

2. Harvey 1995, p. 159–169.

15. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

3. Dumoulin 2005a, p. xvii.
4. Yoshizawa 2010, p. 41.
5. Sekida 1989.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 59.
16. Fischer-Schreiber 2008, p. 103.
17. Ven. Dr. Yuanci, A Study of the Meditation
Methods in the DESM and Other Early Chinese

6. Poceski & Year unknown.

Texts , The Buddhist Academy of China.

7. Borup 2008, p. 8.

18. Zhang, Shengyen; Dan Stevenson (2002).

8. Yampolski 2003a, p. 3.

Hoofprint of the Ox: Principles of the Chan

9. Dumoulin 2005a, p. 48.
10. Lievens 1981, p. 52–53.

Buddhist Path as Taught by a Modern Chinese
Master. Oxford University Press, pp. 27-28.
19. Zhang, Shengyen; Dan Stevenson (2002).

11. Dumoulin 2005a, p. 41–45.

Hoofprint of the Ox: Principles of the Chan

12. Kasulis 2003, p. 24.

Buddhist Path as Taught by a Modern Chinese

13. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 58.
14. Deleanu, Florin (1992); Mindfulness of
Breathing in the Dhyāna Sūtras . Transactions

Master. Oxford University Press, pp. 29-30.
20. Mcrae, John R. Seeing through Zen:
Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in
Chinese Chan Buddhism, University of California
Press, 2004, p. 39.

21. Gregory, Peter N; Ch 'ang-lu Tsung-tse and

East Asian Buddhism). University of Hawaii

Zen Meditation in 'Traditions of Meditation in

Press. pp. 68–69. ISBN 0824814274.

Chinese Buddhism'.

34. Bodiford, William M. (2006). Koan practice.

22. Katsuki Sekida, Zen Training: Methods and

In: "Sitting with Koans". Ed. John Daido Loori.

Philosophy, Shambhala Publications, 2005, p. 60.

Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, p. 94.

23. Omori Sogen, Introduction To Zen Training,

35. Lachs 2006.

Routledge, 2012, p. 49.
24. Katsuki Sekida, Zen Training: Methods and
Philosophy, Shambhala Publications, 2005, p. 61.
25. Taizan Maezumi, Bernie Glassman (editors)
On Zen Practice: Body, Breath, and Mind, pp. 4142.
26. Katsuki Sekida, Zen Training: Methods and
Philosophy, Shambhala Publications, 2005, p. 64.
27. Kapleau, P. The Three Pillars of Zen, 2013, p.
12.
28. Taigen Dan Leighton. Cultivating the Empty
Field: The Silent Illumination of Zen Master
Hongzhi, Tuttle, 2000, p. 17
29. Sheng Yen, John Hurrell Crook, Shengyan,
Illuminating Silence: The Practice of Chinese
Zen, Watkins Publishing,, 2002, p. 93.
30. Taigen Dan Leighton. Cultivating the Empty
Field: The Silent Illumination of Zen Master
Hongzhi, Tuttle, 2000, pp. 1-2
31. Zhang, Shengyen; Dan Stevenson (2002).
Hoofprint of the Ox: Principles of the Chan
Buddhist Path as Taught by a Modern Chinese
Master. Oxford University Press, p. 152.
32. Blyth 1966.
33. Buswell, Robert E. (1991). Tracing Back the
Radiance: Chinul's Korean Way of Zen (Classics in

36. Loori 2006.
37. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, 2017, p. 35.
38. Luk, Charles. The Secrets of Chinese
Meditation. 1964. p. 44
39. Nan, Huai-Chin. Basic Buddhism: Exploring
Buddhism and Zen. 1997. p. 92
40. Aitken, Robert, The Practice of Perfection:
The Paramitas from a Zen Buddhist Perspective,
Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 2012.
41. Shohaku Okumura, Living by Vow: A Practical
Introduction to Eight Essential Zen Chants and
Texts, Simon and Schuster, 2012, p. 15.
42. Sheng Yen, Shengyan, Dharma Drum: The
Life and Heart of Chan Practice, Shambhala
Publications, 2006.
43. Mcrae, John R. Seeing through Zen:
Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in
Chinese Chan Buddhism, University of California
Press, 2004, p. 32.
44. Jeffrey Lyle Broughton, Zongmi on Chan, p.
171.
45. "The ten essential precepts" . San Francisco
Zen Center.
46. Kenji Matsuo, A History of Japanese
Buddhism, Global Oriental, 2007, p. 32.

47. Baroni, Helen J. The Illustrated Encyclopedia

59. Shahar, Meir, The Shaolin Monastery: History,

of Zen Buddhism, p. 93.

Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts, University

48. Borup, Jorn, Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism,
BRILL, 2008, p. 247.
49. Ling, Haicheng (2004). Buddhism in China.
Chinese Intercontinental Press, p. 184.
50. Zhang, Shengyen; Dan Stevenson (2002).
Hoofprint of the Ox: Principles of the Chan
Buddhist Path as Taught by a Modern Chinese
Master. Oxford University Press, p. 56.
51. Asian American Religious Cultures [2
volumes], edited by Jonathan H. X. Lee,
Fumitaka Matsuoka, Edmond Yee, Ronald Y.
Nakasone, ABC-CLIO, 2015, p. 470.
52. Stephen Addiss, John Daido Loori, The Zen
Art Book: The Art of Enlightenment, p. 1.
53. Stephen Addiss, John Daido Loori, The Zen
Art Book: The Art of Enlightenment, p. 4.
54. Stephen Addiss, John Daido Loori, The Zen
Art Book: The Art of Enlightenment, p. 15.
55. Christensen, Matthew B. A Geek in China:
Discovering the Land of Alibaba, Bullet Trains and
Dim Sum. Tuttle Publishing. p. 40.
ISBN 1462918360.
56. Shahar, Meir, The Shaolin Monastery: History,
Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts, University
of Hawaii Press, 2008, p. 55, 80.
57. Shahar, Meir, The Shaolin Monastery: History,
Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts, University
of Hawaii Press, 2008, p. 2.
58. Shahar, Meir, The Shaolin Monastery: History,
Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts, University
of Hawaii Press, 2008, pp. 80, 144.

of Hawaii Press, 2008, pp. 147.
60. Shahar, Meir, The Shaolin Monastery: History,
Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts, University
of Hawaii Press, 2008, p. 138, 173.
61. Zhang, Shengyen; Dan Stevenson (2002).
Hoofprint of the Ox: Principles of the Chan
Buddhist Path as Taught by a Modern Chinese
Master. Oxford University Press, pp. 34-35.
62. Mann, Jeffrey, When Buddhists Attack: The
Curious Relationship Between Zen and the
Martial Arts, p. 61.
63. Takuan Soho, The Unfettered Mind: Writings
from a Zen Master to a Master Swordsman, p.
xv.
64. Waddell, Norman (ed. & trans.), Hakuin's
Precious Mirror Cave: A Zen Miscellany, 2009, p.
83.
65. Shohaku Okumura, Living by Vow: A Practical
Introduction to Eight Essential Zen Chants and
Texts, Simon and Schuster, 2012, p. 1.
66. Steven Heine, Dale S. Wright (editors), Zen
Ritual: Studies of Zen Buddhist Theory in
Practice, Oxford University Press, USA, 2008, p.
127.
67. Kapleau, Phillip (1989a). The Three Pillars of
Zen: Teaching, Practice and Enlightenment. NY:
Anchor Books, p. 21.
68. Wilson, Jeff, Mourning the Unborn Dead: A
Buddhist Ritual Comes to America
69. Jiang Wu, Enlightenment in Dispute: The
Reinvention of Chan Buddhism in Seventeenth-

Century China, Oxford University Press, USA,
2011, pp. 145-147.

13th Centuries), BRILL, 2015, pp. 277-278.
81. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism

70. Sheng Yen, Shengyan, Orthodox Chinese

and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, pp.

Buddhism: A Contemporary Chan Master's

298-299.

Answers to Common Questions, North Atlantic
Books, 2007, p. 76.
71. Repentance Ritual of the Emperor of Liang: A
complete translation of Repentance Dharma of
Kindness and Compassion in the Bodhimanda,
Buddhist Text Translation Society, 2017.
72. Dumoulin, Heinrich , Zen Enlightenment:
Origins and Meaning, Shambhala Publications,
2007, p. 136.
73. Steven Heine, Dale S. Wright (editors), Zen
Ritual: Studies of Zen Buddhist Theory in
Practice, Oxford University Press, USA, 2008, p.
124-25.
74. Bodiford 1992.

82. Meinert, Carman (editor), Transfer of
Buddhism Across Central Asian Networks (7th to
13th Centuries), BRILL, 2015, p. 300.
83. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism
and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, p. 589.
84. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism
and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, pp.
617, 635-9.
85. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism
and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, pp.
924-925.
86. DT Suzuki discusses what he calls “the
Shingon elements of Chinese Zen” in his Manual
of Zen Buddhism (1960, 21) and “the Chinese

75. Baroni, Helen J. The Illustrated Encyclopedia

Shingon element” in The Training of the Zen

of Zen Buddhism, The Rosen Publishing Group,

Buddhist Monk (1965, 80).

2002, p. 215.

87. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism

76. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism

and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, pp.

and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, pp.

827-829.

926.
77. "kwanumzen.org How to practice sitting
meditation" .
78. Borup, Jørn, Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism:
Myōshinji, a living religion, BRILL, 2008, p. 218,
241.
79. Unno, Mark, Shingon Refractions: Myoe and

88. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism
and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, p. 927.
89. Orzech; Sørensen; Payne, Esoteric Buddhism
and the Tantras in East Asia, BRILL, 2011, p. 931.
90. Dumoulin 2005a, p. 85-94.
91. Lai 1985, p. 17-18.

the Mantra of Light, Ch. 1.

92. Cheng 1981.

80. Meinert, Carman (editor), Transfer of

93. Lai 1985.

Buddhism Across Central Asian Networks (7th to

94. Newland 2001, p. 137.

95. Kalupahana 1994, p. 228-236.

114. Low 2006.

96. Gregory, Peter N. Tsung-Mi and the

115. Low 2000.

Siniﬁcation of Buddhism, University of Hawaii
Press, 2002, p. 7.

116. Yampolsky, P. The Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch: The Text of the Tun-huang

97. Payne, Richard Karl; Leighton, Taigen Dan,

Manuscript with Translation, Introduction, and

eds. (2006). Discourse and Ideology in Medieval

Notes, Columbia University Press, 1967, pp. 112-

Japanese Buddhism. Critical Studies in

114.

Buddhism. Routledge. ISBN 978-0415359177.
98. Suzuki 1997, p. 154.
99. Buswell 1993, p. 245.
100. Abe 1996, p. 19.
101. Luk & Year unknown, p. 59-60.
102. Schlütter 2008, p. 3.
103. Lachs 2012, p. 4.
104. Mcrae, John R. Seeing through Zen:
Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in

117. Sharf 1995c, p. 427.
118. Sasaki 2009.
119. Low 2000, p. 4.
120. McRae 2003.
121. Welter 2000.
122. Welter 2000, p. 94.
123. Yanagida 2009, p. 62.
124. Hori 2000, p. 296.

Chinese Chan Buddhism, University of California

125. Hori 2000, p. 295-297.

Press, 2004, pp. 57, 63.

126. Yoshizawa 2009, p. 42.

105. Mcrae, John R. Seeing through Zen:

127. Hori 2000, p. 297.

Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in
Chinese Chan Buddhism, University of California

128. Ferguson 2000, p. 17.

Press, 2004, p. 60.

129. Lai 2003, p. 17.

106. Heine 2000, p. 245.

130. McRae 2003, p. 62.

107. Tomoaki 2003, p. 280.

131. Lai 2003, p. 18.

108. Tomoaki 2003, p. 284.

132. Domoulin-2005a, p. 49-51.

109. Dumoulin 2005b, p. 380.

133. Snelling 1987, p. 157-158.

110. Sekida (translator) 1996.

134. Low 2000, p. 83-112.

111. Cleary 2010, p. xii–xiii, quoting Hakuin.

135. Dumoulin 2005a, p. 45-49.

112. Yen 1996, p. 54).

136. Low 2000, p. 135-154.

113. Kapleau 1989.

137. Lai 2003.

138. Welter 2000, p. 82-86.
139. Welter 2000, p. 83.
140. Chappell 1993, p. 192.
141. Koné 2000.

162. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 4.
163. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 5.
164. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

142. Sharf 1995b.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 6.

143. McRae 2002.

165. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

144. Borup 2008.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, pp. 7-9.

145. Hori 1994.

166. Dumoulin 2005a.

146. Sharf 1995c.

167. Ray, Gary L. The Northern Ch'an School And

147. Bell 2002.

Sudden Versus Gradual Enlightenment Debates In
China And Tibet, Institute Of Buddhist Studies

148. Lachs 1999.

Berkeley.

149. McMahan 2008.

168. Whalen Lai 1985.

150. Sharf 1993.

169. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

151. Sharf 1995.
152. McRae 2005.
153. Heine 2007.
154. Jorgensen 1991.
155. Heine 2008, p. 6.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 13.
170. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 13.
171. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 14.
172. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

156. Wolfe 2009, p. iii.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 20.

157. Katz 2007.

173. McRae 2003, p. 13, 18–19.

158. McRae 2003, p. 11-21.

174. Yampolski 2003a, p. 15.

159. McRae 2003, p. 13.

175. Yu, Chun-Fang, 1979, Ta-hui Tsung-kao and

160. McRae 2003, p. 13, 15–17.
161. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch,
translated with notes by Philip B. Yampolsky,
1967, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-23108361-0, page 29, note 87

Kung-an Ch'an, Journal of Chinese Philosophy, v.
6, p. 211-235
176. McRae 1993, pp. 119–120.
177. Yampolski 2003b, p. 266.
178. Welter & year unknownb.

179. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

190. Keown, Damien. A Dictionary of Buddhism.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, pp. 23,

2003. p. 104

27.

191. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

180. Schlütter 2008.

Buddhism, 2017, p. 35.

181. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

192. Meng-Tat Chia 2011.

Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 29.

193. Buswell, Robert Jr; Lopez, Donald S. Jr.,

182. Heng-Ching Shih (1987). Yung-Ming's

eds. (2013). "Xuyun", in Princeton Dictionary of

Syncretism of Pure Land and Chan, The Journal

Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

of the International Association of Buddhist

Press. p. 1017. ISBN 9780691157863.

Studies 10 (1), p. 117
183. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2017, p. 31.
184. "Daoist Philosophy," by Ronnie Littlejohn,
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN
2161-0002, http://www.iep.utm.edu/.

194. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan
Buddhism, 2017, pp. 38-39.
195. Powers, John, A Concise Encyclopedia of
Buddhism, Oneworld Publications, 2013 , p.238
196. Borup, Jørn; Qvortrup Fibiger, Marianne;
Eastspirit: Transnational Spirituality and Religious

185. McRae 2003, p. 13, 19–21.

Circulation in East and West, BRILL, 2017, p. 168.

186. Gimello 1994.

197. Aitken 1994.

187. Stanley Weinstein, "The Schools of Chinese

198. Josephine Nock-Hee Park, Apparitions of

Buddhism," in Kitagawa & Cummings (eds.),

Asia: modernist form and Asian American poetics,

Buddhism and Asian History (New York:

p. 63

Macmillan 1987) pp. 257–265, 264.

199. Watts, Alan W. “Beat Zen, Square Zen, and

188. Youru Wang, Historical Dictionary of Chan

Zen.” Chicago Review, vol. 12, no. 2, 1958, pp. 3–

Buddhism, 2017, p. 34.

11. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/25293448.

189. Sharf 2002.

Sources
Printed sources
Abe, Masao; William R. LeFleur (translator) (1989), Zen and Western Thought, University of Hawaii Press
Abe, Masao; Heine, Seteven (1996), Zen and Comparative Studies, University of Hawaii Press
Aitken, Robert (1994), Foreword to "A Buddhist Bible", Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press
Anderson, Reb (2000), Being Upright: Zen Meditation and the Bodhisattva Precepts, Rodmell Press

Arokiasamy, Arul M. (2005), Zen: Awakening to Your Original Face, Chennai, India: Thiruvanmiyur
Batchelor, Martine (2004), The Path Of Compassion: The Bodhisattva Precepts, Rowman Altamira
Bell, Sandra (2002), "Scandals in emerging Western Buddhism", Westward Dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia
(PDF), Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 230–242

Benesch, Oleg (2016), Reconsidering Zen, Samurai, and the Martial Arts , The Asia Paciﬁc Journal: Japan
Focus
Bodiford, William M. (1992), "Zen in the Art of Funerals: Ritual Salvation in Japanese Buddhism", History of
Religions, 32 (2): 150
Bodiford, William M. (1993), Sōtō Zen in Medieval Japan, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 0-8248-1482-7
Borup, Jørn (2008), Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism: Myōshinji, a Living Religion, Brill Publishers
Broughton, Jeffrey L. (1999), The Bodhidharma Anthology: The Earliest Records of Zen, Berkeley: University of
California Press, ISBN 0-520-21972-4
Brown Holt, Linda (1995), "From India to China: Transformations in Buddhist Philosophy" , Qi: The Journal of
Traditional Eastern Health & Fitness
Buswell, Robert E. (1991), "The "Short-cut" Approach of K'an-hua Meditation: The Evolution of a Practical
Subitism in Chinese Ch'an Buddhism". In: Peter N. Gregory (editor) (1991), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to
Enlightenment in Chinese Thought, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited
Buswell, Robert E (1993), Ch'an Hermeneutics: A Korean View. In: Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.)(1993), Buddhist
Hermeneutics, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Blyth, R. H. (1966), Zen and Zen Classics, Volume 4, Tokyo: Hokuseido Press
Chappell, David W. (1993), Hermeneutical Phases in Chinese Buddhism. In: Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.)(1993),
Buddhist Hermeneutics, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Cheng, Hsueh-Li (1981), "The Roots of zen Buddhism" , Journal of Chinese Philosophy, 8: 451–478
Cleary, Thomas (2010), Translator's introduction. The Undying Lamp of Zen. The Testament of Zen Master
Torei, Boston & London: Shambhala Publications
Collins, Randall (2000), The Sociology of Philosophies: A Global Theory of Intellectual Change, Harvard
University Press
Dumoulin, Heinrich (2000), A History of Zen Buddhism, New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd.
Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005a), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 1: India and China, World Wisdom Books,
ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1
Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005b), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 2: Japan, World Wisdom Books, ISBN 978-0941532-90-7
Faure, Bernard (2000), Visions of Power. Imaging Medieval Japanese Buddhism, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press

Ferguson, Andy (2000), Zen's Chinese Heritage, Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications, ISBN 0-86171-163-7
Ford, James Myoun, A Note On Dharma Transmission And The Institutions Of Zen
Foulk, T. Griﬃth (n.d.), History of the Soto Zen School
Fowler, Merv (2005), Zen Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices , Sussex Academic Press
Gimello, Robert M. (1994), Marga and Culture: Learning, Letters, and Liberation in Northern Sung Ch'an. In:
Buswell & Gimello (editors)(1994), Paths to Liberation. Pages 475–505, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers
Goddard, Dwight (2007), "History of Ch'an Buddhism previous to the times of Hui-neng (Wie-lang)", A
Buddhist Bible , Forgotten Books
Gregory, Peter N. (1991), Sudden Enlightenment Followed by Gradual Cultivation: Tsung-mi's Analysis of mind.
In: Peter N. Gregory (editor)(1991), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited
Gregory, Peter N. (1993), What Happened to the "Perfect Teaching"? Another lOok at Hua-yen Buddhist
hermeneutics. In: Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.)(1993), Buddhist Hermeneutics, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Grigg, Ray (1994), The Tao Of Zen, Charles E. Tuttle Company
Harvey, Peter (1995), An introduction to Buddhism. Teachings, history and practices, Cambridge University
Press
Haskel, Peter (1984), Bankei Zen. Translations from The Record of Bankei, New York: Grove Weidenfeld
Heine, Steven; Wright, Dale S. (2000). The Koan: Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism . Oxford University
Press. ISBN 0-19-511748-4.
Heine, Steven (2007), "A Critical Survey of Works on Zen since Yampolsky.", Philosophy East & West, 57 (4):
577–592
Heine, Steven (2008), Zen Skin, Zen Marrow
Hisamatsu, Shin'ichi; Gishin Tokiwa; Christopher Ives (2002), Critical Sermons of the Zen Tradition:
Hisamatsu's Talks on Linji, University of Hawaii Press
Hori, Victor Sogen (1994), "Teaching and Learning in the Zen Rinzai Monastery"
Studies, 20 (1): 5–35, archived from the original

(PDF), Journal of Japanese

(PDF) on 2018-07-07, retrieved 2012-07-16

Hori, Victor Sogen (2000), Koan and Kensho in the Rinzai Zen Curriculum. In: Steven Heine and Dale S. Wright
(eds)(2000): "The Koan. Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Hori, Victor Sogen (2005), Introduction, Zen Buddhism: A History

(PDF), by Dumoulin, Heinrich, Volume 2:

Japan, translated by Heisig, James W.; Knitter, Paul, World Wisdom Books, p. xiii–xxi, ISBN 978-0-941532-907
Hu Shih (1953), "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China. Its History and Method" , Philosophy East & West, 3 (1): 3–
24
Huaijin, Nan (1997), Basic Buddhism: Exploring Buddhism and Zen, York Beach: Samuel Weiser

Isshū, Miura; Sasaki, Ruth F. (1993), The Zen Koan, New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, ISBN 0-15-6999811
Jaksch, Mary (2007), The Road to Nowhere. Koans and the Deconstruction of the Zen Saga

(PDF)

Jorgensen, John (1991), "Heinrich Dumoulin's Zen Buddhism: A History", Japanese Journal of Religious
Studies, 18 (4)
Kalupahana, David J. (1992), The Principles of Buddhist Psychology, Delhi: ri Satguru Publications
Kalupahana, David J. (1994), A history of Buddhist philosophy, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private
Limited
Kapleau, Philip (1989), The three pillars of Zen
Kasulis, Thomas P. (2003), Ch'an Spirituality. In: Buddhist Spirituality. Later China, Korea, Japan and the Modern
World; edited by Takeuchi Yoshinori, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Katz, Jerry (2007), One: Essential Writings on Nonduality, Sentient Publications
Koné, Alioune (2000), Zen In Europe: A Survey of the Territory , archived from the original

on 2012-05-07,

retrieved 2012-07-16
Lachs, Stuart (2002), Richard Baker and the Myth of the Zen Roshi
Lachs, Stuart (2006), The Zen Master in America: Dressing the Donkey with Bells and Scarves
Lachs, Stuart (2011), When the Saints Go Marching In: Modern Day Zen Hagiography
Lachs, Stuart (2012), Hua-t’ou : A Method of Zen Meditation

(PDF)

(PDF)

Lai, Whalen (1985), "Ma-Tsu Tao-I And The Unfolding Of Southern Zen" , Japanese Journal of Religious
Studies, 12 (2/3): 173–192
Lai, Whalen (2003), Buddhism in China: A Historical Survey. In Antonio S. Cua (ed.): Encyclopedia of Chinese
Philosophy

(PDF), New York: Routledge, archived from the original

(PDF) on November 12, 2014

Lathouwers, Ton (2000), Meer dan een mens kan doen. Zentoespraken, Rotterdam: Asoka
Liang-Chieh (1986), The Record of Tung-shan, Kuroda Institute (translator: William F. Powell)
Lievens, Bavo (1981), Ma-tsu. De gesprekken, Bussum: Het Wereldvenster
Loori, John Daido (2006), Sitting with Koans: Essential Writings on Zen Koan Introspection, Wisdom
Publications, ISBN 0-86171-369-9
Low, Albert (2000), Zen and the Sutras, Boston: Turtle Publishing
Low, Albert (2006), Hakuin on Kensho. The Four Ways of Knowing, Boston & London: Shambhala
Luk, Charles (translator) (n.d.), The Surangama Sutra
archived from the original

(PDF), Buddha Dharma Education Association Inc.,

(PDF) on October 23, 2013

Maezumi, Taizan; Glassman, Bernie (2007), The Hazy Moon of Enlightenment, Wisdom Publications

Matthiessen, Peter (1987), Nine-headed dragon river: Zen journals, 1969–1985, Shambhala
McCauley, Charles (2005), Zen and the Art of Wholeness, iUniverse
McMahan, David L. (2008), The Making of Buddhist Modernism, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19518327-6
McRae, John (1991), Shen-hui and the Teaching of Sudden Enlightenment in Early Ch'an Buddhism. In: Peter N.
Gregory (editor)(1991), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited
McRae, John (2003), Seeing Through Zen , The University Press Group Ltd
McRae, John (2004), The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra

(PDF), Berkeley,

CA: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, ISBN 1886439311, archived from the original
(PDF) on 2014-09-12

McRae, John (2005), Critical introduction by John McRae to the reprint of Dumoulin's A history of Zen
(PDF)

McRae, John (2008), The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, translated from the Chinese of Zongbao (Taishō
Volume 48, Number 2008)

(PDF), archived from the original

(PDF) on August 22, 2012

Meng-Tat Chia, Jack (2011), "A Review of Enlightenment in Dispute: The Reinvention of Chan Buddhism in
Seventeenth-Century China"

(PDF), Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 18

Mumon, Yamada (2004), The Ten Oxherding Pictures, University of Hawai'i press (translator: Victor Sōgen
Hori)
Nadeau, Randall L. (2012), The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Chinese Religions, John Wiley & Sons
Newland, Guy, Schijn en werkelijkheid. De twee waarheden in de vier boeddhistische leerstelsels,
KunchabPublicaties
Oh, Kang-nam (2000), "The Taoist Inﬂuence on Hua-yen Buddhism: A Case of the Scinicization of Buddhism
in China" , Chung-Hwa Buddhist Journal (13)
Pajin, Dusan (1988), "On Faith in Mind – Translation and Analysis of the Hsin Hsin Ming", Journal of Oriental
Studies, 26 (2): 270–288
Poceski, Mario (n.d.), Attitudes Towards Canonicity and Religious Authority in Tang Chan
Sato, Kemmyō Taira, D.T. Suzuki and the Question of War

(PDF)

Sasaki, Ruth Fuller (2009), The Record of Linji. Translation and commentary by Ruth Fuller Sasaki. Edited by
Thomas Yūhō Kirchner

(PDF), Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press

Schlütter, Morten (2008), How Zen became Zen. The Dispute over Enlightenment and the Formation of Chan
Buddhism in Song-Dynasty China, Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-3508-8
Sekida, Katsuki (1989), Zen Training: Methods and Philosophy, Shambhala

Sekida, Katuski (1996), Two Zen Classics. Mumonkan, the gateless gate. Hekiganroku, the blue cliff record,
New York & Tokyo: Weatherhill
Sharf, Robert H. (1993), "The Zen of Japanese Nationalism" , History of Religions, 33 (1): 1–43
Sharf, Robert H. (1995), Whose Zen? Zen Nationalism Revisited

(PDF)

Sharf, Robert H. (1995b), "Buddhist Modernism and the Rhetoric of Meditative Experience"

(PDF), NUMEN,

42
Sharf, Robert H. (1995c), "Sanbokyodan. Zen and the Way of the New Religions"

(PDF), Japanese Journal of

Religious Studies, 22 (3–4)
Shimano, Eido T. (1991), Points of Departure: Zen Buddhism With a Rinzai View, Livingston Manor, NY: The Zen
Studies Society Press, ISBN 0-9629246-0-1
Snelling, John (1987), The Buddhist handbook. A Complete Guide to Buddhist Teaching and Practice, London:
Century Paperbacks
Suzuki, Shunryu (1997), Branching streams ﬂow in the darkness: Zen talks on the Sandokai , University of
California Press
Swanson, Paul L. (1993), "The Spirituality of Emptiness in Early chinese Buddhism", in Takeuchi Yoshinori
(ed.), Buddhist Spirituality. Indian, Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese, New York: Crossroad
Tetsuo, Otani (2003), To Transmit Dogen Zenji's Dharma

(PDF)

Tomoaki, Tsuchida (2003), "The Monastic spirituality of Zen Master Dogen", in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.),
Buddhist Spirituality. Indian, Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Torei (2010), The Undying Lamp of Zen. The Testament of Zen Master Torei, Boston & London: Shambhala
(translator: Thomas Cleary)
Tweed, Thomas A. (2005), "American Occultism and Japanese Buddhism. Albert J. Edmunds, D. T. Suzuki,
and Translocative History"
original

(PDF), Japanese Journal of Religious Studies, 32 (2): 249–281, archived from the

(PDF) on May 22, 2012

Verstappen, Stefan H. (2004), Blind Zen
Victoria, Brian Daizen (2006), Zen at war (Second ed.), Lanham e.a.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers, Inc.
Victoria, Brian Daizen (2010), "The "Negative Side" of D. T. Suzuki's Relationship to War"

(PDF), The Eastern

Buddhist, 41 (2): 97–138
Waddell, Norman (2010), Foreword to "Wild Ivy: The Spiritual Autobiography of Zen Master Hakuin", Shambhala
Publications
Wai-tao (translator) (1994), "The Diamond Sutra", A Buddhist Bible, Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press
Wayman, Alex and Hideko (1990), The Lion's roar of Queen Srimala, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers
Welter, Albert (n.d.), The Textual History of the Linji lu (Record of Linji): The Earliest Recorded Fragments

Welter, Albert, The Formation of the Linji lu: An Examination of the Guangdeng lu/Sijia yulu and Linji Huizhao
Chanshi yulu. Versions of the Linji lu in Historical Context

(PDF), archived from the original

(PDF) on 2013-

03-16
Welter, Albert (2000), Mahakasyapa's smile. Silent Transmission and the Kung-an (Koan) Tradition. In: Steven
Heine and Dale S. Wright (eds)(2000): "The Koan. Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism, Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Wolfe, Robert (2009), Living Nonduality: Enlightenment Teachings of Self-Realization, Karina Library
Wright, Dale S. (2010), "Humanizing the Image of a Zen master: Taizan Maezumi Roshi", in Steven Heine and
Dale S. Wright (ed.), Zen Masters, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Yampolski, Philip (1967), The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. Translated with notes by Philip B.
Yampolsky, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-08361-0
Yampolski, Philip (2003a), "Chan. A Historical Sketch.", in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.), Buddhist Spirituality.
Indian, Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Yampolski, Philip (2003b), "Zen. A Historical Sketch", in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.), Buddhist Spirituality. Indian,
Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Yanagida, Seizan (2009), Historical Introduction to The Record of Linji. In: The record of Linji, translated by Ruth
Fuller Sasakia e.a. Pages 59–115

(PDF), University of Hawaii Press

Yen, Chan Master Sheng (1996), Dharma Drum: The Life and Heart of Ch'an Practice, Boston & London:
Shambhala
Yoshizawa, Katsuhiro (2009), The Religious Art of Zen Master Hakuin, Counterpoint Press
Young, Stuart (2009), Linji Lu and Chinese Orthodoxy. Review of "Albert Welter. The Linji lu and the Creation of
Chan Orthodoxy: The Development of Chan's Records of Sayings Literature.

Web sources
1. Sheng, Yen. "Fundamentals of Meditation" .
2. Sōtō Zen Text Project. "Zazengi translation" . Stanford University. Archived from the original
17 November 2015. Retrieved 15 November 2015.
3. Sōtō Zen Text Project. "Fukan Zazengi" . Stanford University. Archived from the original

on

2008-04-29. Retrieved 2008-03-26.
4. Dan Arnold, Madhyamaka Buddhist Philosophy, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
5. "Pointing at the moon" . Khandro.net. Retrieved 2013-02-04.
6. "Lankavatara Sutra, chapter LXXXII, p.192 Suzuki-translation, p.223/224 in brackets" . Lirs.ru.
2008-06-16. Retrieved 2013-02-04.
7. "Soto Zen" . The Soto Zen Buddhist Association. Retrieved February 19, 2013.

on

8. aqua-palette,Inc. "Ningen Zen" . Ningen Zen. Archived from the original

on 2013-03-16.

Retrieved 2013-02-04.
9. "Andre van de Braak, ''ZEN SPIRITUALITY IN A SECULAR AGE. Charles Taylor and Zen Buddhism
in the West''" . Retrieved 2013-02-04.
10. "Rinzai-Obaku Zen – What is Zen? – History" . Zen.rinnou.net. Retrieved 2013-02-04.

Further reading
Modern works
D.T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series (1927), Second Series (1933), Third Series (1934)
R. H. Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, 5 volumes (1960–1970; reprints of works from 1942 into the
1960s)
Alan Watts, The Way of Zen (1957)
Lu K'uan Yu (Charles Luk), Ch'an and Zen Teachings, 3 vols (1960, 1971, 1974), The Transmission
of the Mind: Outside the Teaching (1974)
Paul Reps & Nyogen Senzaki, Zen Flesh, Zen Bones (1957)
Philip Kapleau, The Three Pillars of Zen (1966)
Shunryu Suzuki, Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind (1970)
Katsuki Sekida, Zen Training: Methods & Philosophy (1975)
Classic historiography
Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 1: India and China. World Wisdom
Books.ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1
Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 2: Japan. World Wisdom
Books.ISBN 978-0-941532-90-7
Critical historiography
Overview
Heine, Steven (2007), "A Critical Survey of Works on Zen since Yampolsky"

(PDF), Philosophy

East & West, 57 (4): 577–592
Formation of Chán in Tang & Song China
Mcrae, John (2003), Seeing through Zen. Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in Chinese
Chan Buddhism. The University Press Group Ltd .ISBN 978-0-520-23798-8

Welter, Albert (2000), Mahakasyapa's smile. Silent Transmission and the Kung-an (Koan) Tradition.
In: Steven Heine and Dale S. Wright (eds)(2000): "The Koan. Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism,
Oxford: Oxford University Press
Schlütter, Morten (2008), How Zen became Zen. The Dispute over Enlightenment and the Formation
of Chan Buddhism in Song-Dynasty China, Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, ISBN 978-0-82483508-8
Japan
Bodiford, William M. (1993), Sōtō Zen in Medieval Japan, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 0-82481482-7
Modern times
Victoria, Brian Daizen (2006), Zen at war (Second ed.), Lanham e.a.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld
Publishers, Inc.
Sharf, Robert H. (1995a), Whose Zen? Zen Nationalism Revisited

(PDF)

Orientalism and East-West interchange
Borup, Jorn (n.d.), Zen and the Art of inverting Orientalism: religious studies and genealogical
networks
King, Richard (2002), Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and "The Mystic East",
Routledge
McMahan, David L. (2008), The Making of Buddhist Modernism. Oxford University Press.ISBN 9780-19-518327-6
Contemporary practice
Borup, Jørn (2008), Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism: Myōshinji, a Living Religion, Brill
Hori, Victor Sogen (1994), "Teaching and Learning in the Zen Rinzai Monastery"

(PDF), Journal of

Japanese Studies, Vol (1): 5–35
Buswell, Robert E. (1993a), The Zen Monastic Experience: Buddhist Practice in Contemporary
Korea, Princeton University Press

External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zen Buddhism.
Look up

禪 in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up

禅 in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to: Zen proverbs
Look up zen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
thezensite
Zen Buddhism WWW Virtual Library
Chart of (Asian) Zen schools
Glossary of Japanese Zen terms

Last edited 6 days ago by Shantavira

